#
Abroad, Study Term
ABROD
Education Abroad Program Examinations and Timetabling
Undergraduate Courses
ABROD 800 Study Term Abroad Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). This course is reserved for students who wish to maintain registration while participating in formal University of Alberta managed and approved Study Abroad programs. Students are registered in this course for each approved term of study abroad. The only fees assessed for this registration are the normal registration and transcript fees associated with the term. Students are eligible to register in the course on more than one occasion. Closed to web registration. Contact the Education Abroad Program, University of Alberta International.
#
Accounting
ACCTG
Department of Accounting, Operations and Information Systems Faculty of Business
Notes
(1) Enrolment in all ACCTG courses, except ACCTG 300, is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
(2) See also Management Information Systems listing.
Undergraduate Courses
ACCTG 300 Introduction to Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides a basic understanding of accounting: how accounting numbers are generated, the meaning of accounting reports, and how to use accounting reports to make decisions. Note: Not open to students registered in the Faculty of Business. Not for credit in the Bachelor of Commerce Program.
ACCTG 311 Introduction to Accounting for Financial Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1.5s-0). How to prepare and interpret financial statements that report to decision makers external to the enterprise, such as shareholders and creditors. Course includes principles and standards of balance sheet valuation, income measurement, financial disclosure and cash flow analysis that link preparation and use of such statements. Prerequisites: ECON 101 and 102.
ACCTG 322 Introduction to Accounting for Management Decision Making Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In contrast to the external orientation of ACCTG 311, this course focuses on how to prepare and use accounting information for management decision making. Major topics include: the role of corporate goals, planning and control concepts, how costs behave and how to analyze and manage them, budgeting and performance measures. Prerequisite: ACCTG 311.
ACCTG 412 Financial Reporting for Managers and Analysts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course is for students who are not accounting majors and is especially useful for those contemplating a career in financial management or a CFA designation. It is for students who want to build on the financial accounting knowledge developed in ACCTG 311, and provides the necessary foundation for courses in financial statement analysis and tax. Further depth is provided in balance sheet valuation, income measurement, earnings per share and cash flow analysis. Prerequisite: ACCTG 311. Corequisite: FIN 301. Not open to students with credit in ACCTG 414 or 415.
ACCTG 414 Intermediate Financial Accounting I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). First of two courses covering principles, methods and applications of current and proposed Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Emphasizes accounting for operating and investment assets, and related income measurement and disclosure. Prerequisites: ACCTG 311 and 322. Not open to students with credit in ACCTG 412. There is a consolidated exam for ACCTG 414.
ACCTG 415 Intermediate Financial Accounting II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Second of two courses (see ACCTG 414) covering principles, methods and applications of current and proposed Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Emphasizes accounting for financing, liabilities and equity, related income measurement and disclosure, and cash flow. Prerequisites: FIN 301, and a minimum grade of C- in ACCTG 414 or 412.
ACCTG 416 Accounting Theory and Current Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major concepts and current issues in accounting thought are examined in an interactive setting. Topics include: the conceptual framework, standard-setting, concepts of income and value, accounting’s role in capital markets and in contracts such as for lending and compensation, and recent and emerging issues related to financial and managerial accounting information. Prerequisites: ACCTG 414 or 412; FIN 301. Open only to fourth-year Business students, or by consent of the Department Chair. There is a consolidated exam for ACCTG 416.
ACCTG 418 Advanced Financial Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course analyzes the concepts and practices underlying financial reporting in more complex areas such as business combinations, multinational operations, future income taxes and not for profit organizations. Prerequisite: ACCTG 415. Open only to fourth-year Business students or by consent of the Department Chair.
ACCTG 424 Intermediate Management Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasizes mastery of techniques for implementation and evaluation of cost systems for management and decision making. Cost issues include: accumulating and analyzing costs using actual, standard and activity-based approaches, overhead allocation and cost estimation. Management topics include: pricing, production and investment decisions, revenue analysis, performance evaluation, management incentive systems and strategy analysis. Linear programming and multiple regression may be used. Prerequisites: ACCTG 322 and MGTSC 312. There is a consolidated exam for ACCTG 424.
ACCTG 426 Management Control Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current research and cases in accounting and control with a particular focus on strategy, governance and control processes in modern organizations. Topics include: control system design (including governance and audit), responsibility accounting, performance management, and strategic management accounting. Prerequisite: ACCTG 424. Open only to fourth year Business students, or by consent of Department Chair.
ACCTG 432 Financial Statement Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). May be taken on its own or as the first of a two- course sequence that develops student competence in using financial information. Using case analysis, students learn to value a firm through the use of a five-step process: (1) examination of firm’s industry, markets and strategy, (2) evaluation of firm’s accounting policies and their impact on the financial reports, (3) applying fundamental analysis to assess financial strengths and weaknesses, (4) forecasting future earnings and cash flows, and (5) applying valuation models. Corequisites: ACCTG 415 or 412.
ACCTG 437 Accounting Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the field of computerized accounting information systems in organizations: basic transaction processing, record updating and maintenance, and financial and managerial reporting functions. Concentrates on the scope of accounting information systems in organizations; impacts of computerized accounting information systems on the role of the professional accountants; design issues for accounting information systems: security, accuracy, integrity, recovery, and operational control issues relating to accounting information systems; and impacts of computerized accounting information systems on the auditing processes in organizations. Prerequisites: ACCTG 311, 322, MIS 311. Credit may be granted for only one of ACCTG 437 or MIS 437.
ACCTG 456 Assurance on Financial Information Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the external auditor’s provision of assurance services on financial information. Topics include: society’s demand for various assurance services; the role, profession, ethics, independence and liability of the assurance provider; assurance risk and strategy; assurance planning, operations and reports; computerization and internal control; and emerging assurance services. Prerequisite: ACCTG 414 or 412.
ACCTG 463 Accounting for Natural Resources, Energy, and the Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers accounting rules and practice in the area of natural resources, energy and the environment. Some topics include mineral rights and exploration costs, emissions trading, environmental reporting and liabilities. While it does contain technical material, it is meant for both accounting and non-accounting students. Both International and U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) will be explored. The focus will be on understanding how firms in this area report their natural resource assets and related liabilities. Prerequisite: ACCTG 311. ACCTG 412 or 414 are recommended.
ACCTG 467 Basic Income Tax Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the concepts, regulations and interpretations underlying individual and corporate income tax from the tax professional’s perspective. Topics include: structure of the Income Tax Act, residency requirements, employment income, business and property income, capital gains, and the calculation of tax payable for individuals. Tax planning is introduced and opportunities for tax planning are identified where appropriate as topics are covered. Prerequisite: ACCTG 414 or 412.
ACCTG 468 Corporate Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the major tax concepts behind the specific provisions of the Income Tax Act in the taxation of corporations, corporate distributions and transactions between corporations and their shareholders. Emphasis on applying the Act in practical problems and case settings. Prerequisite: ACCTG 467.
ACCTG 480 Accounting Honors Seminar Part I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is primarily a case-based course that covers the preparation of integrated pro forma financial statements and their use in making financial decisions, as well as selected other topics in financial accounting. Topics will vary from year to year with case selection, and may include (but are not necessarily limited to) the areas of revenue recognition, cash flow analysis, intangible assets, asset impairment, inter-corporate investments, hybrid debt securities, leases, pensions, and equity-based compensation. While the course contains sufficient technical material to ensure familiarity with the financial reporting issues discussed, the main emphasis of the course will be on the interpretation and use of financial information for purposes of decision making. Prerequisites: ACCTG 415, FIN 301
ACCTG 481 Accounting Honors Seminar Part II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers 3 topic areas: (1) History of accounting thought including coverage of current standard setting activities, (2) Professionalism in accounting including exposure to current practical issues requiring professional judgment, and (3) Exposure to current accounting research and design of research studies. Prerequisite: ACCTG 415.
ACCTG 488 Selected Topics in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Acceptable as a Group A elective in the Major in Accounting. Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites: ACCTG 311, 322 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
ACCTG 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. May be considered as a Group A or Group B elective at the discretion of the Department. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
ACCTG 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: ACCTG 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
ACCTG 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: ACCTG 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
ACCTG 501 Introduction to Financial Reporting and Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Accounting information’s role in recording and reporting on economic and business events including the primary financial statements: balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow. Concepts and purposes underlying financial reporting. Selection of accounting policies and their informational effects for external users. The course begins to develop students’ abilities to evaluate and interpret financial information through basic financial analysis.
ACCTG 523 Accounting Information and Internal Decision Making Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Accounting concepts used by managers in planning and decision-making. The course introduces concepts of cost and profit behavior, contribution margin, and activity-based costing, as well as relevant costs and revenues for production, marketing and capital budgeting decisions. The course also introduces students to the management planning and control system and its components - budgets, variance analysis, performance evaluation in centralized and decentralized organizations, and management compensation plans. The importance of designing a system to fit the organizations’ strategy is emphasized. Prerequisite: ACCTG 501.
ACCTG 601 Case Studies in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Develops students’ competence in analyzing case studies in financial and managerial accounting. Topics covered include identification of financial and managerial reporting needs, preparation of financial reports, planning budgeting and forecasting, governance, and enterprise risk management. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
ACCTG 610 Financial Reporting for Managers and Analysts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intended for students who would like to build on the financial accounting knowledge developed in ACCTG 501, and is especially useful for those contemplating a career in financial management. Useful both as a stand-alone course and as a foundation for further study in financial statement analysis. Provides further depth in balance sheet valuation and income measurement in order to enhance students’ ability to use financial accounting as a management tool. Prerequisite: ACCTG 501. Corequisite: FIN 501 or 503. Students may receive credit for only two of the following three courses: ACCTG 610, 614 and 615.
ACCTG 614 Intermediate Financial Accounting I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). First of two courses covering the theory, methods, strengths, and weaknesses of current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Prerequisite: ACCTG 501. Students may receive credit for only two of ACCTG 610, 614, and 615.
ACCTG 615 Intermediate Financial Accounting II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Second of two courses covering theory, methods, strengths, and weaknesses of current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Prerequisite: ACCTG 614. Students may receive credit for only two of the following three courses: ACCTG 610, 614, and 615.
ACCTG 616 Seminar in Financial Accounting Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory and propositions underlying current financial accounting practices and alternative theories of accounting measurement as proposed in the literature. The function of accounting in relation to the decision processes of the principal external users of accounting data is considered. Prerequisites: ACCTG 614 or 610, FIN 501 or 503.
ACCTG 618 Seminar in Advanced Accounting Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of accounting methods to incorporate investments and other advanced topics in financial reporting. Prerequisites: ACCTG 615.
ACCTG 624 Seminar in Management Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar consisting of topics concerned at an advanced level with generating and using accounting and related data in the planning and control functions of organizations. Prerequisite: ACCTG 523.
ACCTG 625 Performance Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses advanced topics in performance management including identification of organizational reporting systems to meet strategic goals, cost management, and measurement of performance on both an organizational and individual level. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
ACCTG 626 Seminar in Managerial Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current research and cases in managerial accounting. Prerequisites: ACCTG 523.
ACCTG 630 Financial Statement Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Develops students’ competence in analyzing financial statements and using financial information to make investment decisions, both equity and debt. The primary thrust of the course is aimed at equity investments. Students learn a five step process of analysis for equity investments: (1) An examination of the firm’s industry, markets and strategy, (2) An evaluation of the firm’s accounting policies and their impact on the financial reports, (3) Applying fundamental analysis to assess financial strengths and weaknesses, (4) Forecasting future earnings and cash flows, and (5) Applying valuation models to assess the current price. A comparable process for lending decisions is then developed. Prerequisite: ACCTG 501. Corequisite: FIN 501 or 503.
ACCTG 656 Auditing History, Theory, and Current Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the external auditor’s provision of assurance services on financial information. Topics include: society’s demand for various assurance services; the role, profession, ethics, independence and liability of the assurance provider; assurance risk and strategy; assurance planning, operations and reports; computerization and internal control; and emerging assurance services. Prerequisite: ACCTG 614 or 610.
ACCTG 657 Advanced Auditing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers advanced topics in internal control/audit, external assurance engagements, audit and assurance service planning, and preparation of financial reports. Analysis of accounting policies and transactions and the role of audit committees and other corporate governance mechanisms will be discussed. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
ACCTG 663 Accounting for Natural Resources, Energy and the Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers accounting rules and practice in the area of natural resources, energy and the environment. Some topics include mineral rights and exploration costs, emissions trading, environmental reporting and liabilities. While it does contain technical material, it is meant for both accounting and non-accounting students. Both International and U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) will be explored. The focus will be on understanding how firms in this area report their natural resource assets and related liabilities. Prerequisite: ACCTG 501.
ACCTG 667 Basic Income Tax Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the concepts, regulations and interpretations underlying individual and corporate income tax from the tax professional’s perspective. Topics include: structure of the Income Tax Act, residency requirements, employment income, business and property income, capital gains, and the calculation of tax payable for individuals. Tax planning is introduced and opportunities for tax planning are identified where appropriate as topics are covered. Prerequisite: ACCTG 614 or 610.
ACCTG 668 Corporate Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the major tax concepts behind the specific provisions of the Income Tax Act in the taxation of corporations, corporate distributions and transactions between corporations and their shareholders. Emphasis on applying the Act in practical problems and case settings. Prerequisite: ACCTG 667.
ACCTG 686 Selected Topics in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
ACCTG 688 CPA Capstone 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers topics as required for the Capstone 1 module of the CPA Professional Education Program. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
ACCTG 689 CPA Capstone 2 Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers topics as required for the Capstone 2 module of the CPA Professional Education Program. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
ACCTG 701 The Methodological Foundations of Accounting Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Because the practice of accounting and the use of accounting information are complex and multifaceted, a wide variety of research approaches provide an understanding of accounting. These approaches are primarily in the social sciences, but also in mathematics and some of the humanities, such as history and philosophy. The purpose of this course is to examine some of the fundamental ideas and concepts underlying the research process in accounting. It focuses on the philosophy of the social sciences, since they provide the core of theory and methods for accounting research. Topics include the objectives of social science research; the nature and role of theories; the relationship between facts and values; theory construction, testing, falsification and inference; positivist vs. non-positivist methods; social studies of science and scientists; and research ethics (including research involving human subjects). The emphasis is on the scientific method broadly construed and applied, rather than on specific techniques. Open to all doctoral students or with written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
ACCTG 703 Accounting Research Workshop Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Based on the Department’s research workshop program, this course will discuss research methodology as it applies to accounting and ensure students learn how to review/evaluate current research and literature. Students are expected to present their own research and to analyze the research of others. This workshop is a single term course offered over two terms. Students are expected to attend regularly throughout their doctoral program, but register for credit in their second year (prior to taking accounting comprehensive examination).
ACCTG 705 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ACCTG 706 Behavioral Research in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A generalist course on research that is primarily oriented to individual behavior in accounting settings. Topics covered will include individual cognitive processes and limitations, the experimental method, and a broad survey of experimental studies (drawing on psychology and economics) conducted in accounting settings. Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
ACCTG 707 Introduction to Accounting in its Organizational and Social Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A generalist course that examines historical, sociological and organizational perspectives on accounting. Topics covered will vary, but will include the development of accounting thought, historical and field methods in accounting research, theories of accounting change, political economy of accounting, and analysis of the accounting profession and regulatory institutions. Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
ACCTG 708 Introduction to Financial Economics Based Research in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory course on research that examines the role of accounting information in market economies and organizations. Topics covered will vary, but will include the theory and developments underlying financial economic research and a broad survey of empirical and analytical studies conducted in accounting settings. Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
ACCTG 711 Seminar on Judgement and Decision Making Research in Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Judgement and Decision Making research draws on theories in psychology, economics, statistics and cognitive science to examine issues in accounting and auditing. Reviews work on a range of issues such as accountability, fraud detection, accounting policy choice, the effect of discretion in accounting rules on decisions made by managers, investors and auditors, and how well auditors can assess the knowledge and/or preferences of other agents. Students may conduct an empirical study (e.g., an experiment, survey, simulation or case study) as part of the course. Some literature in behavioral finance and marketing may also be covered. Pre or corequisite: MGTSC 705 (or equivalent). Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
ACCTG 820 Financial Accounting Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Reporting of financial results of operations and financial positions to investors and managers; the use of accounting information for decision making. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
ACCTG 830 Organization Planning and Control Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Implementing financial performance measurement, evaluation and control systems, and organizational designs that enhance performance; understanding organizational structures and processes. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
#
Agreement Formal (Registration)
AGRMT
Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research
Graduate Courses
AGRMT 903 Formal Agreement Registration Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). This course is reserved for University of Alberta graduate students participating in an approved program administered under a formal agreement between the University of Alberta and other institution(s), who wish to maintain part-time registration at the University of Alberta while studying at an approved partner institution. Closed to web registration. Registration is recommended to the FGSR by the student’s home unit.
AGRMT 906 Formal Agreement Registration Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). This course is reserved for University of Alberta graduate students participating in an approved program administered under a formal agreement between the University of Alberta and other institution(s), who wish to maintain full-time registration in the Spring and Summer terms at the University of Alberta while studying at an approved partner institution. Closed to web registration. Registration is recommended to the FGSR by the student’s home unit.
AGRMT 909 Formal Agreement Registration Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). This course is reserved for University of Alberta graduate students participating in an approved program administered under a formal agreement between the University of Alberta and other institution(s), who wish to maintain full-time registration at the University of Alberta while studying at an approved partner institution. Closed to web registration. Registration is recommended to the FGSR by the student’s home unit.
#
Agricultural and Resource Economics
AREC
Department of Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Notes
(1) Before 2003-2004, Agricultural and Resource Economics courses (AREC) were listed as Agricultural Economics (AG EC).
(2) See also Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Forest Economics (FOREC), Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Courses (INT D) and Rural Sociology (R SOC) listings for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
AREC 173 The Plate, the Planet and Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A cornerstone course that provides an introduction to social perspectives on everything from what we eat for breakfast to how we protect endangered species and agricultural landscapes. Topics covered include current issues around food production and consumption and issues related to sustainability of our natural and social systems. Debates over new technologies (e.g., GMOs, nanotechnology), food, environment, and health can only be understood in the context of political, economic and personal decisions.
AREC 200 Current Economic Issues for Agriculture and Food =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Applications of economic principles to problems and current issues relating to agriculture, food and the environment. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or consent of Department. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 200 and AG EC 200.
AREC 214 Applications of Linear Models to Food, Resources and the Environment =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). An introduction to methods and tools that are used to solve linear quantitative problems. Emphasis is on the use of these techniques for economic analysis in applications related to agriculture, food, forestry, and the environment. Classroom examples, laboratory assignments and computer tutorials are provided to give practice in applying quantitative tools to empirical problems. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1. Credit will be granted for only one of AREC 214 and AG EC 316.
AREC 250 Social and Economic Issues of Food Biotechnology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an introduction to the economics and business concepts in the biotechnology industry with an emphasis on food produced using genetic modification and other food technologies. The basic science behind GM foods will be discussed, but most of the material will focus on the social, economic, environmental, and legal issues surrounding GM foods. Key questions will be addressed using peer-reviewed literature and case studies, and the material will be presented from various disciplinary viewpoints.
AREC 313 Statistical Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). Analysis of economic data relating to renewable resource sectors including agriculture, food, forestry, and the environment; collection of data, sampling methods, tests of hypotheses, index numbers, analysis of variance, regression, and correlation; time series analysis. Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 313 and AG EC 416.
AREC 323 Introduction to Management for Agri-Food, Environmental, and Forestry Businesses =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles and practical aspects of business management, and their relevance to the managing businesses involved in a variety of industries, including agriculture, environment, food, and forestry. Topics include business planning and organizing, and issues related to the management of financial, physical, and human resources. Prerequisite: ECON 101. Not open to students in BSc Agriculture Business Management, Food Business Management, or Forest Business Management.
AREC 333 Economics of Production and Resource Management =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). Application of economic concepts and introduction of management tools related to production decision-making for resource-based businesses. Integration of biophysical and environmental relationships with economic objectives in allocating resources. Introduction to quantitative tools used in applied production management decision-making. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AG EC 200, ECON 281, INT D 365, AREC 365 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 333 and AG EC 333.
AREC 365 Natural Resource Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economics of natural resources; resource scarcity, conservation, sustainability, water resource issues, fisheries, forestry, agriculture, recycling, property and tenure institutions, and public resource policy. Credit will be given for only AREC 365 and ECON 365. Prerequisite: ECON 101.
AREC 375 World Food and Agriculture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Economic issues in international agriculture including the world food problem, agricultural development; agricultural and food trade and policy and selected agricultural biotechnology issues. Selected international applications and issues are stressed. Prerequisite: One of the following: ECON 101 or consent of Department. Credit will only be given for one of INT D 303, AREC 375, AREC 475 and AG EC 475.
AREC 382 Economics of Food Systems, Distribution and Supply Chains Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Application of economic concepts and introduction to issues in international food systems, distribution and farm-to-plate supply chains, including modern retailing and branding, competition, product innovation and food technology, vertical coordination and agri-food trade, governance, private assurance mechanisms and food policy. Selected case study applications and current topics are discussed. Prerequisite: ECON 101.
AREC 384 Food Market Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Applications of price and market theories to marketing problems and issues for food and agricultural products. Topics include: market structures and marketing functions; price analysis; futures markets; economics of food safety and quality; and international food marketing. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AG EC 200, ECON 281, INT D 365, AREC 365 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 384 and AG EC 384.
AREC 400 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study of a selected topic or problem supervised by a Faculty member, requiring preparation of written reports. Prerequisite: consent of the Department Chair.
AREC 410 Advanced Methods and Applications in Applied Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Empirical applications of methods used in resource, environmental, agri-food, and forest economics. Involves one or more case study projects that focus on the empirical examination of economic issues in renewable resource management. Credit will be given for only one of AREC 410 and ENCS 410. Prerequisites: AREC 313 by consent of Instructor. Open to fourth year students in Agricultural/Food Business Management, Agriculture (Agricultural and Resource Economics major), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (Environmental Economics and Policy major) and Forest Business Management programs, or consent of Instructor. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AREC 423 Advanced Management Methods and Applications for Agri- Food, Environmental and Forestry Businesses Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Empirical applications of management and research methods used by business managers. Emphasis is given to integrating economic and business management concepts with applications to problems and issues in agriculture, food, the environment and forestry. Prerequisites: AREC 313 or consent of Instructor. Open to fourth year students in Agricultural/Food Business Management, Agriculture (Agricultural and Resource Economics major), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (Environmental Economics and Policy major) and Forest Business Management, Nutrition and Food Science (Food marketing minor and Food Policy minor) programs, or consent of Instructor. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AREC 430 Economic Impact Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Examination of the theory and application of economic assessment methods with a focus on the evaluation of environmental, agricultural and natural resource projects, regulatory policy, and planning. Includes case studies of recent project and policy proposals to illustrate the methods used to evaluate economic benefits and costs of such proposals. Applications to estimating private economic benefits. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AREC 365, ECON 281, or equivalent, or consent of Instructor. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 430, 450, 530 and 550.
AREC 433 Financial Management in Resource Industries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Recent theoretical and empirical developments in finance are applied to natural resource industries including agribusiness, farming, forestry and food. Emphasis on capital budgeting, financial risk, and associated topics for long run investment planning in smaller business enterprises. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AG EC 200, ECON 281, INT D 365, AREC 365, FIN 301 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 433 and AG EC 433.
AREC 465 Advanced Natural Resource Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Applied economic modeling of resource utilization and environmental issues with a focus in forestry and agriculture. Topics may include current Canadian and international issues in the area of environmental valuation, energy, climate change, biodiversity and conservation as related to Forestry and Agriculture. Prerequisite: AREC 365 or consent of instructor; AREC 313 and ECON 281 recommended. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 465 and INT D 665.
AREC 471 Society and Well-Being =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Economic, political, historical, and legal perspectives on how and why governments promote well-being in areas such as food safety, nutritional policy, consumer protection, recreation, and the workplace. Topics include the historical development of wellness-related policies, how these decisions are made in society, and economic and moral justifications for such interventions. Prerequisites: One of the following: AREC 200, ECON 281, AREC 365, ECON 365, or consent of the instructor.
AREC 473 Food and Agricultural Policies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economics of public policy for agriculture and food industries. Public choice principles and institutions. Farm and food policy in Canada and selected countries. Case studies on price and output policy; agricultural trade; food safety and quality; resource use and environmental sustainability; and/or rural change/restructuring. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, ECON 281, AREC 365, ECON 365, or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 473 and AG EC 473.
AREC 482 Cooperatives and Alternative Business Institutions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The impact of agri-food and resource market structures on market conduct and performance; the impact of market structure on selection of cooperative versus investor owned firms including differences in firm objectives, performance and management incentives; topics may also include effects of firm type on community development and policy formation. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AG EC 200, ECON 281, INT D 365, AREC 365 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 482 and AG EC 482.
AREC 484 Strategic Management in Food and Resource Businesses =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of strategic management concepts and applications to agri-food and resource industries. The development of business and corporate strategies including competitive positioning; sustaining competitive advantage; vertical coordination and strategic alliances in value chains; corporate diversification and global business strategy. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AREC 323, AG EC 200, AG EC 323, ECON 281, INT D 365, AREC 365 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 484 and AG EC 484.
AREC 485 Trade and Globalization in Food and Resources =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles and policies affecting international trade in food, forestry and natural resources. Current issues in trade, including fair trade concerns, trade in capital and services, effects of food safety and quality standards, and environmental issues surrounding trade agreements and institutions. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AREC 365, ECON 365, R SOC 355 or equivalent. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 485 and AG EC 485.
AREC 487 Managing Market Risk in Resource Industries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the mechanics and economic functions of commodity futures and options derivative markets. Topics include the theory and practice of hedging, price formation and issues unique to commodities. Emphasis on concepts and analysis to evaluate derivative markets; use of derivatives to manage market risk in agribusiness, forestry and other resource businesses. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AREC 365, ECON 281, FIN 301, or equivalent, or consent of instructor.
AREC 488 Introduction to Agricultural and Resource Game Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Game theory analyzes situations in which payoffs to agents depend on the behavior of other agents. Basics of game theoretic analysis are introduced. Applications to the agri-food and resource industries are discussed. Prerequisites AREC 200, AREC 365, or ECON 281.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) See also INT D 565 for a course offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as an option or as a course.
(2) Undergraduate AREC courses at the 400 level may be taken for credit by graduate students in Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology.
AREC 500 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study or special topics course in agricultural and resource economics under the supervision of a Faculty member. Prerequisite: consent of Department Chair.
AREC 502 Advanced Price Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of consumer demand and producer supply analysis including theoretical and empirical approaches to the analysis of consumer and producer choice. Applications include food demand analysis (single equations and systems approaches), price expectations and producer supply decisions, market model simulation and policy evaluation, and economic welfare measurement. Corequisite: ECON 481.
AREC 513 Econometric Applications =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Econometric theory, multiple linear regression analysis and interpretation, simultaneous equation estimation, qualitative choice models, time series analysis, applications of econometric techniques to resource and agricultural economic problems. Prerequisite: Intermediate course in statistics or econometrics. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 513 and AG EC 513.
AREC 514 Quantitative Techniques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Selected applications of econometrics, operations research, and mathematical programming to economic problems in resource, agriculture, forestry, and food sectors. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 514 and AG EC 514.
AREC 530 Economic Impact Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Examination of the theory and application of economic assessment methods with a focus on the evaluation of environmental, agricultural and natural resource projects, regulatory policy, and planning. Includes case studies of recent project and policy proposals to illustrate the methods used to evaluate economic benefits and costs of such proposals. Applications to estimating private economic benefits. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, AREC 365, ECON 281, or equivalent, or consent of Instructor. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 430, 450, 530 and 550.
AREC 533 Production Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Static and dynamic firm theory, production principles applied to resource use, resource and product combination, cost structure, uncertainty and expectations. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor; (AREC 313 or AG EC 416) and ECON 481 recommended. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 533 and AG EC 533.
AREC 543 Advanced Topics in Production Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical models and empirical methods for issues and problems in production economics. Topics will vary with developments in this field but may include efficiency analysis, risk and uncertainty, simulation and mathematical programming models. Prerequisites: Consent of Instructor. AREC 533 and ECON 481 recommended.
AREC 565 Economic Valuation of Ecosystem Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic valuation of ecosystem goods and services. Topics include: Theoretical and empirical analysis of environmental valuation methods, advanced benefit cost analysis, welfare economics, valuation of ecosystem goods and services, valuation of health impacts from environmental quality change, and linkages to experimental and behavioural economics. Prerequisite: *3 Introductory Econometrics course and consent of instructor; AREC 502 recommended. [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology]
AREC 569 Advanced Topics in Natural Resource and Environmental Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical analysis and modeling of renewable resource and environmental issues at local and global levels. Includes analysis of international environmental issues, the effect of economic growth on the environment, sustainable development, and local and global commons management. Prerequisite: ECON 481 or consent of Department. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 569 and AG EC 569.
AREC 573 Agricultural Economics Policy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Goals and instruments of agricultural policy, model constructions with decision and control criteria; national, regional, and provincial agricultural application. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor; (AREC 313 or AG EC 416) and (AREC 502 or AG EC 502) recommended. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 573 and AG EC 573.
AREC 575 Agriculture in Developing Countries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Role of agriculture in the economic growth of developing countries; use of economic theory, simulations and contemporary econometric methods to understand the forces that shape the welfare of households and individuals in poor agrarian communities. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AREC 582 Industrial Organization in Food and Resource Industries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of firm behavior and market structure in agri-food and resource sectors using industrial organization principles. Introduction to the internal organization of firms with applications to incentives, contracts, and corporate finance. Other topics involve ownership forms such as co-operatives; impacts of market structure on selection of firm structure; and the importance of firm objectives, performance and management incentives. Prerequisite: consent of instructor, ECON 481 recommended.
AREC 584 Marketing Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Microeconomic theory and analysis of markets for agricultural and food products. Topics will vary with the evolution of the literature but may include alternative market structures, market regulation, empirical price analysis, advertising, location theories, the role of information in markets, the role of uncertainty in markets, and organization structures. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. (AREC 313 or AG EC 416) and (AREC 502 or AG EC 502) recommended. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 584 and AG EC 584.
AREC 585 Agricultural Trade =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Concepts and principles underlying international trade and specialization applied to agricultural and food products. Protection and its economic impacts. Agricultural trade policy, institutions and agreements. The role of agricultural trade in developed and less developed countries. Analysis of imperfect markets and alternative approaches to trade liberalization. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 585 and AG EC 585.
AREC 600 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of selected research problems and design of research projects in production economics, natural resource economics, or marketing economics. Prerequisite: consent of Department Chair.
AREC 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). Credit will only be given for one of AREC 900 and AG EC 900.
#
Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science
AFNS
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Animal Science (AN SC), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Interdisciplinary (INT D), Nutrition (NUTR), Nutrition and Food Science (NU FS), Plant Science (PL SC), Renewable Resources (REN R) and Soil Science (SOILS) for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
AFNS 401 Honors Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to BSc Honors in Food Science students. Presentations by students, faculty and invited speakers. Offered concurrently with the Food Science section of AFNS 601. Only open to students in the BSc Honors in Food Science. Pre or corequisite: NU FS 407.
AFNS 414 Lipid Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals in lipid biochemistry featuring learning modules of relevance to students of plant, food and animal science, and human nutrition, and other life science. Topics include characteristics of lipids, environmental effects on lipid metabolism, oilseed biotechnology and biomass solutions for petrochemical alternatives. Offered in alternate years commencing 2009/10. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 514). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 414 and 514. Prerequisites: (BIOCH 200 or PL SC 331 or 345) or consent of Instructor.
AFNS 416 One Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). ‘One Health’ is an emerging paradigm in public and veterinary health which recognizes that human, animal and environmental health are interlinked. The course will address food and water safety, the increase in prevalence of antibiotic resistant organisms, emerging infectious zoonotic diseases, environmental protection and environmental sustainability, emphasizing the interaction of these diverse yet interconnected disciplines in protecting the health of populations. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 516) Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 416, 516 or SPH 416, 516. Prerequisites: *3 microbiology and *3 physiology or consent of instructor.
Graduate Courses
Note: Prerequisites are shown to provide an indication of the background that is expected for these courses. Students not having the prerequisites for a course are encouraged to discuss their case with the course Instructor.
AFNS 500 Individual Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Project or reading course under the supervision of a Faculty member requiring preparation of a comprehensive report. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: May be taken more than once provided the topic is different.
AFNS 501 Advanced Human Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). This is an advanced course that highlights recent developments in human metabolism research. Lectures in fundamentals of human metabolism and nutrition related to each topic will be presented to complement discussion and critical review of readings from primary research and review papers. Application of new findings to understanding of basic metabolic regulation and metabolic diseases will be addressed. Prerequisites: Undergraduate degree in Nutrition, Biochemistry, Physiology or a related discipline and consent of Instructor.
AFNS 502 Advanced Study of Food Fermentations Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Readings and class presentations on current developments in bacterial or fungal fermentation of foods. Development in Probiotics. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 402, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 502 and NU FS 402. Prerequisite: MICRB 265 or NU FS 361 or 363.
AFNS 503 Processing of Milk and Dairy Products Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Technological principles of milk treatment and processes for fluid milk products; concentrated, dried, sterilized and fermented dairy products; cheese, butter and ice cream. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 403, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 503 and NU FS 403. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 504 Muscle Food Science and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Biological, biochemical, chemical, and technological aspects of the processing of animal muscle food including seafood product technology. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 404, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 504 and NU FS 404. Prerequisite: *3 in Biochemistry.
AFNS 506 Rangeland Plant Communities of Western Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Examines major rangeland plant communities and their physical environments in western Canada, including individual plant identification and ecology. Includes a review of various land uses such as livestock and wildlife grazing within these communities, their response to disturbances such as herbivory and fire, and other management considerations. Lectures and labs are the same as for ENCS 406, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 506 and ENCS 406. Prerequisite: ENCS 356 or consent of instructor. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science]
AFNS 507 Science and Technology of Cereal and Oilseed Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Biological, biochemical, chemical, and technological aspects of the processing of cereals and oilseeds. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 406, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 507 and NU FS 406. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
AFNS 508 Applied Bioinformatics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduction to databases, software tools, and analysis methods used to characterize DNA and protein sequences. Topics include information retrieval from sequence databases, protein function prediction, assessing sequence similarity, measuring gene expression, and the analysis of high-throughput sequencing data. Offered in even numbered years. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 508 or AFNS 460. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 510 Renewable Biomaterials Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Fundamentals in bio-based materials development, characterization, and applications. Sources and classification of biomaterials, synthesis of renewable polymeric biomaterials, their characterization using different techniques, and industrial applications will be discussed. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 511 Veterinary Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Application of immunological principles to the understanding of animal health and disease with a focus on livestock and companion animals. Students will apply a broad understanding of host-pathogen interactions and the basic mechanisms of disease progression to assess the short and long-term impact of pathogenesis to the health of animals, their caretakers, and consumers. Lectures will be followed by active discussion of selected readings. Lectures are the same as for AN SC 411, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 511 and AN SC 411. Prerequisite: (IMIN 200 or equivalent) and consent of instructor.
AFNS 514 Lipid Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals in lipid biochemistry featuring learning modules of relevance to students of plant, food and animal science, and human nutrition, and other life science. Topics include characteristics of lipids, environmental effects on lipid metabolism, oilseed biotechnology and biomass solutions for petrochemical alternatives. Offered in alternate years commencing 2009/10. Lectures are the same as for AFNS 414, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 514 and AFNS 414. Prerequisites: (BIOCH 200 or PL SC 331 or PL SC 345) or consent of Instructor.
AFNS 516 One Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). ‘One Health’ is an emerging paradigm in public and veterinary health which recognizes that human, animal and environmental health are interlinked. The course will address food and water safety, the increase in prevalence of antibiotic resistant organisms, emerging infectious zoonotic diseases, environmental protection and environmental sustainability, emphasizing the interaction of these diverse yet interconnected disciplines in protecting the health of populations. Lectures and labs are the same as for AFNS 416, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 416, 516 or SPH 416, 516. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
AFNS 520 Ruminant Physiology and Metabolic Diseases Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A discussion-based course on current literature in digestive physiology, endocrinology, and metabolic diseases of ruminant animals. Offered only in odd numbered years. Prerequisite: *3 in each of Nutrition and Physiology.
AFNS 521 Carcass and Meat Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). The conversion of muscle to meat in livestock and poultry: definitions and measurement of carcass and meat quality; influences of pre- and post-slaughter factors on carcass and meat quality. The lab will consist of a two-day field trip during Reading Week. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 420, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 521 and AN SC 420. Prerequisites: *3 Biochemistry or AN SC 320 and consent of instructor.
AFNS 522 Advanced Biocatalysis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Will focus on taking a practical approach to whole cell fermentation systems and enzyme-based approaches as well as synthetic biology. The students will learn the theories behind, and applications of, the most commonly used approaches in the bio-industrial and food industries. The course will deploy a mixture of lectures, peer discussion and debate, guest speakers, and group activities. Prerequisite: *3 Microbiology or Food Microbiology, or consent of instructor.
AFNS 524 Nutrition and Metabolism Related to Cancer Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course to address nutritional issues specifically related to cancer prevention, diagnosis, treatment and recovery. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 424, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 524, NU FS 424, ONCOL 524 and 424. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. (Offered jointly by the Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science and the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry). [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science].
AFNS 527 Food Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Providing students with an understanding of the principles of risk: benefit evaluations related to safety concerns about foods. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 427, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 527 and NU FS 427. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
AFNS 528 Advances in Human Nutrition and the Intestinal Microbiome Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Overview of the role of microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract and the impact on human health, interaction with dietary components and potential dietary modulation of the microbiome in the prevention of chronic disease. Seminars are the same as for NU FS 428, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 528 and NU FS 428. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. *3 MICRB and *6 PHYSL recommended.
AFNS 530 Principles of Sensory Evaluation of Foods Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Principles and methods of analysis of the sensory properties of foods; appearance, texture, aroma, and taste. Physiology of sensory receptors. Applications, advantages, and limitations of sensory methods. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 430, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 530 and NU FS 430. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 532 Advanced Food Protein Chemistry and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Chemistry and technology of food protein purification, modification, structure and functional properties. Food related proteins from animal and plant sources will be discussed. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
AFNS 536 Advanced Topics in Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s-0). Exploration of the scientific literature in selected topics in Nutrition. Lectures in fundamentals of human nutrition related to each topic will be presented to compliment discussion and critical review of readings from primary research and review papers. Application of new findings to understanding of human nutrition will be addressed. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 436, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 536 and NU FS 436. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 542 Sustainability of Food and Bio-based Products Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-2s-0). This course provides a comprehensive review on sustainability in the food and “green” products industries, and provides a hands- on introduction to methods such as Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) which is used to evaluate the environmental impact of products and processes. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 442, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate students. Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 442 or AFNS 542. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
AFNS 543 Diabetes, Cardiovascular Disease and Lifestyle Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This is an advanced course examining the relationship between the role of lifestyle factors in the etiology and pathophysiology, as well as the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Application of recent findings to our understanding of these chronic metabolic diseases will be addressed. Lectures are the same as for NUTR 443, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 543 and NUTR 443. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 552 Nutrition in the Prevention of Chronic Human Diseases Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course for graduate students to review current research and the scientific basis of nutrition intervention in the prevention and treatment of chronic human disease. Translation of research findings to nutrition recommendations in topical areas including global health and food supply, obesity, cardiovascular disease, polycystic ovary syndrome and behavior-cognitive disorders. Lectures are the same as for NUTR 452, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 552 and NUTR 452. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. *6 PHYSL recommended.
AFNS 554 Unit Operations in Food Preservation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Processes used in food preservation. Dehydration, freezing, sterilization and canning, irradiation and high pressure processing. Effect of processing on food properties. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 454, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 554 and NU FS 454. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 561 Ruminant Digestion, Metabolism, and Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Integration of theory and practical concepts in ruminant nutrition, digestion and metabolism through topics such as energy flow in ruminants, protein systems and net feed efficiency. Laboratories will involve formulation of rations for various physiological states of beef and dairy cattle, economical rations, feed mixes, protein systems (degradable and undegradable protein systems) and net feed efficiency formulations. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 461, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 561 and AN SC 461. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 562 Swine Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Nutrient utilization and requirements, feed ingredients, and applied feeding program. Feed formulation strategies and current topics in swine nutrition will be discussed in detail. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 462, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 562 and AN SC 462. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 563 Poultry Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Nutritional requirements, feeding programs, and feed ingredients used for poultry. Feed formulation strategies and current topics in poultry nutrition will be discussed extensively. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 463, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AN SC 463, AFNS 515, and 563. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
AFNS 565 Plant Breeding Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on different plant breeding methods and their relationship to the major crop species, as well as use of different molecular and biotechnology techniques in plant breeding. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 565 and PL SC 465. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
AFNS 566 Advanced Food Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). A lecture/discussion course on selected topics in food microbiology. Prerequisite: One of: (MICRB 265, NU FS 361, or 363) and consent of instructor.
AFNS 568 Clinical Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Basic principles of nutrition in clinical situations. The role of diet in the management of various diseases. The laboratory sessions include practical experience in providing individualized nutritional care for clients from various cultural backgrounds. Lectures and labs are the same as for NUTR 468, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 568, NUTR 468 and NU FS 468. Pre- or corequisite: NUTR 301.
AFNS 569 Advanced Animal Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A discussion-based course on selected topics in energy and nitrogen digestion and metabolism in domestic animals. Offered in odd numbered years. Prerequisite: 400 level animal nutrition course and consent of instructor.
AFNS 570 Experimental Procedures in Nutrition and Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Current methodologies in nutrition and metabolism. Prerequisites: NUTR 301 and 302 or equivalent, or consent of Instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for NUTR 504 or AFNS 570.
AFNS 571 Applied Poultry Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Study of avian anatomy, physiology, behavior, and health as it relates to modern poultry production. Current management practices to optimize production efficiency and animal well-being are examined. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 471, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 571 and AN SC 471. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 572 Practical Case Studies in Rangeland Management and Conservation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Cumulative effects of fire, grazing, browsing, and improvement practices on the productivity and species composition of range and pasture ecosystems, including management implications. Extended field trip prior to the start of classes. Lectures and labs are the same as for ENCS 471, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 572 and ENCS 471. Offered in odd-numbered years. Prerequisite: ENCS 356; ENCS 406 strongly recommended.
AFNS 574 Applied Beef Cattle Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Examination of current and potential future production and management practices to optimize production efficiency and animal well-being in the Canadian and international beef industry. Laboratories emphasize practical applications, field trips, and discussion. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 474, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 574 and AN SC 474. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 575 Advanced Functional Genomics Technologies in Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Modular course offering training in a variety of research technologies. Modules offered will vary from term to term. Modules may include HPLC, gel electrophoresis, real-time PCR, gene isolation and cloning, gene amplification, cDNA library screening and microarray. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
AFNS 576 Applied Swine Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Evaluation of swine breeding, feeding, housing management, and disease prevention practices that optimize production efficiency and animal well-being. Laboratories involve analysis of production practices with a view to optimizing efficiency. Lectures and labs are the same as for AN SC 476, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 576 and AN SC 476. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 577 Advanced Community Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Examination of nutrition problems in contemporary communities that relate to health promotion, food security, policy, program planning and community nutrition throughout the life cycle. Discussion of nutrition programs and resources. Students will develop the skills to write a community grant application. Lectures and labs are the same as for NUTR 477, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 577 and NUTR 477. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 578 Advanced Clinical Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The principles of diet therapy in selected areas of current interest. Emphasis on case studies, research and practical problems in clinical dietetics. Lectures and labs are the same as for NUTR 476, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 578 and NUTR 476. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
AFNS 579 Advanced Nutrition: Vitamins and Inorganic Elements Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course in vitamins and inorganic elements. Introduction to seminar presentation and critical evaluation of current literature. Students will also learn the skill of writing a scientific paper. Lectures are the same as for NUTR 479, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 579, NUTR 479, and NU FS 479. Prerequisite: NUTR 302. NUTR 301 (or 303) recommended.
AFNS 580 Advanced Study of Foodborne Pathogens Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Emerging issues in microbiological safety of foods. Reading and class presentations on current developments in the microbiological safety of foods. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 480, with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 580 and NU FS 480. Prerequisite: MICRB 265 or NU FS 361 or 363.
AFNS 581 Advanced Foods Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Critical evaluation of current literature on the effects of ingredients and processing on quality characteristics of foods. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 481, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 581 and NU FS 481. Prerequisites: NU FS 374 and *3 Biochemistry or consent of instructor.
AFNS 582 Diseases of Field and Horticultural Crops Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Diseases of cereal, oilseed, pulse, forage, vegetable, fruit, and ornamental crops. Course is the same as PL SC 481, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Offered in odd-numbered years. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 582 and PL SC 481. Prerequisite: PL SC 380 or consent of instructor.
AFNS 585 Advanced Quantitative Genomics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Genetics and analysis of quantitative traits in farm animals and plants. Detecting, locating and measuring effects of quantitative trait loci (QTL). Recent developments in QTL mapping and discovery. The laboratory sessions include commonly used software for analyzing data from breeding and genomics experiments. Offered in odd numbered years. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
AFNS 595 Integrated Crop Protection Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Integrated agronomic, mechanical, biological, and chemical control of insects, disease organisms, and weeds that interfere with field crop and horticultural crop production. Lectures are the same as for PL SC 495, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 595 and PL SC 495. Prerequisites: At least two of ENT 207, PL SC 352 or PL SC 380 as prerequisites and the third as a corequisite.
AFNS 599 Advanced Agri-Chemical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Advanced analysis of food and agri-industrial materials with a focus on good laboratory practices (GLP), chromatographic techniques (HPLC, GC), mass spectrometry, and other modern techniques from sample preparation to analysis of data. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 499, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 599 and NU FS 499. Prerequisite: NU FS 372 or consent of Instructor.
AFNS 601 Seminar Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to graduate students in AFNS. Presentations by students, faculty and invited speakers. Students register in one of four sections - Animal Science, Plant Science, Food Science or Human Nutrition. Attendance is required of all graduate students throughout their program. MSc students normally register for one term in year 2, and are required to present one seminar; PhD students normally register for one term in each of year 1 and 3, and are required to present one seminar per term. Only open to graduate students in AFNS.
AFNS 602 Graduate Reading Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Individual study. Critical reviews of selected literature under the direction of a Faculty member. Note: May be taken more than once if the topic is different. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
AFNS 603 Graduate Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Directed laboratory study under supervision of a Faculty member. Note: May be taken more than once if the topic is different. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
AFNS 660 Communication in Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Course designed for graduate students in the early stages of their graduate program. Students will learn effective communication skills for life as a graduate student and a future scientist. Topics will include the scientific method; paper, thesis and grant writing; poster and lecture development and delivery; ethics in science; graduate student supervisor relationships. Open only to graduate students in the Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science. Preference given to those in the first year of their program. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
AFNS 675 Introduction to Research Methods in Nutritional Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-0). To develop skills in critical review of the literature, formulation of research questions and hypotheses, and the execution and presentation of research in the nutrition and metabolism fields. Lectures include concepts in experimental design, logistics of data collection and basic statistical analysis. The seminar includes practical application of these tools and completion of a critical review to compliment student’s research program. Normally taken by students in the MSc and PhD in Nutrition and Metabolism during the first year of their graduate studies program.
AFNS 900 Directed Research Project (Course-based Masters) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Individual study supervised by the student’s supervisor, requiring the preparation of a comprehensive report, presentation of a seminar and oral examination by the student’s supervisor and one additional faculty member. Open only to students in the MAg, MEng or MSc course-based program.
#
Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
ALES
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Undergraduate Courses
ALES 204 Communication Fundamentals for Professionals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Successful professionals require strong communication skills. This course focuses on interpersonal communication in professional settings, examining factors that enhance or impede communication and exploring strategies for communicating more effectively with different audiences. Students develop written, visual, and oral communication skills that help them connect with others both in and outside the organization, and convey information in positive and persuasive ways. Open only to Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students. [Human Ecology]
ALES 291 Topics in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. Sections may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ALES 391 Topics in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. Sections may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ALES 491 Topics in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. Sections may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
American Sign Language
ASL
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with an American Sign Language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
Undergraduate Courses
ASL 111 Beginners’ American Sign Language I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Designed to provide basic practical communication and conversational skill in American Sign Language for students with little or no previous background. Covers material in matriculation-level ASL. Note: Not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or students with credit in ASL 35 or its equivalents in Canada or other countries. Not to be taken by students with credit in EDPY 474 or 565.
ASL 112 Beginners’ American Sign Language II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: ASL 111 or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or students with credit in ASL 35 or its equivalents in Canada or other countries.
ASL 211 Intermediate American Sign Language I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Intensive instruction in ASL Topics covered on deaf community and culture. Prerequisite: ASL 35 or ASL 112 or consent of Department.
ASL 212 Intermediate American Sign Language II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: ASL 211 or consent of Department.
#
Anatomy
ANAT
Division of Anatomy
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
ANAT 200 Human Morphology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory survey course in general human anatomy. The course covers the gross and microscopic anatomy of the tissues, organs and organ systems of the body, with emphasis on the relationships, interactions and functions of major structures.
ANAT 305 Cross-Sectional Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). A study of human gross anatomy from a regional perspective, with a particular emphasis on cross-sectional structure and three- dimensional relationships. Students will apply their knowledge to correlate prosected human cadaveric specimens with radiological images derived from a variety of techniques. This course is intended to prepare students who are considering a career in applied radiological imaging and radiotherapy. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or permission of the Department.
ANAT 400 Human Embryonic Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A study of the development of the human embryo from conception to birth. The development of cells, tissues and organs of specific major structures will be covered including their relative development to other systems and structures. An understanding of anomalous development and the ability to survive will be included based on a thorough understanding of normal development. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or consent of Division. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of ANAT 300 or 400.
ANAT 401 Human Neuroanatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A study of the human nervous system including its development and function from an anatomical viewpoint. Both the central and peripheral nervous systems will be presented with some emphasis on abnormal development and its consequences. There will be an emphasis on clinical application where appropriate. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or consent of Division. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of ANAT 301 or 401.
ANAT 402 Human Histology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). A detailed study of the histology of the tissues and organ systems of the human body and the structural principles that govern their organization, interaction and physiological function. Will be based on self- study, utilizing an interactive, web-based learning program, and group discussions during weekly seminar sessions. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or equivalent and consent of Division.
ANAT 403 The Human Body =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 3-0-5). A detailed, regional study of the gross anatomy of the human body using functional, clinical, and evolutionary perspectives. Will include lectures and laboratory sessions involving dissection of human cadavers. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or equivalent and consent of Division.
ANAT 490 Individual Study =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Registration is contingent upon a student having made prior arrangements with a Faculty member in the Division. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once. This is primarily a supervised self-study in any of the anatomical disciplines. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
ANAT 491 Current Topics in Anatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-0). Discussion of topics relevant to the anatomical disciplines. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
ANAT 497 Research Project =OPEN Œ4-8 (variable) (variable, variable). Directed research carried out in the laboratory of an assigned member of the Division. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Successful completion requires a written report and oral presentation on the research project. Registration is contingent upon a student having made prior arrangements with a Faculty member in the Division. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
Graduate Courses
ANAT 500 Human Development Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A study of human development from conception to birth. The formation of tissues and organ systems will be covered, including their relations to other developing systems and structures. An understanding of anomalous development and the ability to survive will be included based on thorough understanding of normal developmental processes. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 or consent of Division. Restricted to students registered in the Pathologist’s Assistant program.
ANAT 503 Human Anatomy Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 3-0-5). A detailed, regional examination of human structure incorporating functional, developmental, clinical and evolutionary perspectives. This course will used both didactic and practical instruction, including the dissection of human cadaveric tissue. Prerequisite: ANAT 200 with a minimum grade of B+ or consent of Division. Restricted to students registered in the Pathologist’s Assistant program.
ANAT 600 Medical Gross Anatomy =OPEN Œ8 (fi 16) (two term, 0-0-12). Advanced study of human gross anatomy. Will entail supervised, self-directed, hands-on dissection by the student for the examination of human structure and function. Particular emphasis will be placed on the clinical relevance of Human Anatomy and its importance to clinical medicine. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
ANAT 603 Medical Histology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-1). Advanced study of human histology with an emphasis on the relevance of histological examination to clinical medicine. Students will participate in discussions and complete a web-based interactive program. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
ANAT 606 Selected Topics in Advanced Human Anatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). An in-depth, supervised, self-directed study focussing on topics relevant to the anatomical disciplines. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once. Registration is contingent upon a student having made prior arrangements with a Faculty member in the Division. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
ANAT 607 Current Topics in Human Anatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-0). Discussion of topics relevant to the anatomical disciplines. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
#
Animal Science
AN SC
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Interdisciplinary (INT D), Nutrition (NUTR), Nutrition and Food Science (NU FS), Plant Science (PL SC), and Renewable Resources (REN R) for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
AN SC 100 Introduction to Animal Health Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An orientation to current issues and challenges related to animal health and disease in a global context. An interdisciplinary overview of the role and importance of animal health in modern society and its relationship to agriculture, food safety and human health. Causes of disease and the principles of maintaining healthy animals. The history and development of animal health professions and their roles. Not available to students who have credit in AN SC 375. Not available to students with *90 in ALES or Science without consent of instructor. Prerequisite: Biology 30.
AN SC 110 Introduction to Equine Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to horses and the horse industry. Principles of equine anatomy, physiology, nutrition, ecology, behavior, genetics, health and welfare. Not available to students with *90 in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences or Science without consent of instructor.
AN SC 120 Companion Animals and Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Diverse and evolving roles of companion animals in human society. Pets and the companion animal industry. Topics include: behavior, cognition and training; breeds and breeding; performance; nutrition, health and physiology. Not available to students with *90 in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences or Science without consent of Instructor.
AN SC 200 Principles of Animal Agriculture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Principles and practices of modern animal production and management. Brief introduction to the structure of the livestock, poultry, and game ranching industries. Principles of animal management, breeding and feeding. Current issues in animal agriculture. Students gain direct experience with animals in production/research environments. Prerequisite: Biology 30.
AN SC 260 Fundamentals of Animal Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Function, metabolism, homeostasis, requirements and sources of nutrients and energy for animals. Laboratory will involve principles of diet formulation. Prerequisite: *3 in university-level biology or chemistry. Credit will be given for only one of AN SC 260, NUTR 260 and 301 or equivalent.
AN SC 310 Physiology of Domestic Animals Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Fundamental principles of regulation and maintenance of the internal environment. Includes a review of mechanisms providing for homeorrhesis and well-being of domestic animals in response to changes in the external environment (e.g., light, temperature, social). Prerequisites: BIOL 107 and *6 in university-level chemistry.
AN SC 311 Metabolic Physiology of Domestic Animals Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The physiological basis of the metabolic processes in domestic animals. Includes a review of the physiological mechanisms and neuroendocrine regulation of digestion, metabolism, growth and lactation. Prerequisite: AN SC 310 or equivalent.
AN SC 312 Reproductive Physiology of Domestic Animals Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The physiological basis of reproduction, fertility and embryonic development in domestic animals in relation to animal productivity. The study of the physiological mechanisms regulating gonadal function, fertilization, implantation, pregnancy and parturition as well as the physiological basis for sound reproductive management. Prerequisite: AN SC 310 or equivalent.
AN SC 318 Influence of Microorganisms on Animal Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of interactions between microorganisms and animals and how these interactions integrate with animal production and improvement of animal health. Emphasis on the evolution and ecology of the microbial inhabitants with the host and the underlying molecular mechanisms of the host microbial interactions. Pre- or corequisite: MICRB 265 or BIOL 207.
AN SC 320 Livestock Growth and Meat Production =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Concepts of growth and development applied to meat production from farm livestock. Form and function of bone, muscle and fat. Livestock and carcass appraisal. Prerequisite: AN SC 200 or *3 in university level biology.
AN SC 375 Animal Health and Disease =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles of maintaining healthy animals, and an examination of current issues related to animal health and disease. Infectious and non-infectious diseases that affect both animal and human health and may impact international trade and export. Disease surveillance, pathophysiology, treatment, prevention, management and economic impact of specific diseases and risks of bioterrorism. Prerequisite: AN SC 100 and 200 or consent of instructor. AN SC 310 or PHYSL 210 or (ZOOL 241 and 242) are recommended.
AN SC 376 Animal Welfare =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of animal welfare as it relates to both food and companion animals. Discussion of the scientific and ethical components that underlie our evaluation of the quality of life that animals experience. Prerequisite: AN SC 200 or (*3 biology and consent of instructor) and *60.
AN SC 377 Food Animal Behaviour =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Basic behaviour principles for food animal species including their application in livestock production systems. Fundamentals of experimental research and design in applied ethology. Prerequisite: AN SC 200 or consent of instructor and *60.
AN SC 378 Companion Animal Behaviour =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Basic behaviour principles for companion animal species such as dogs, cats, and horses, including application of fundamental training and learning techniques to resolve common behaviour problems. Prerequisite: AN SC 100, PSYCO 104 and *60.
AN SC 400 Individual Study =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Project or reading course supervised by a Faculty member, requiring preparation of a comprehensive report. Prerequisites: Third year standing or higher and consent of Department. Note: May be taken more than once if topic is different.
AN SC 411 Veterinary Immunology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Application of immunological principles to the understanding of animal health and disease with a focus on livestock and companion animals. Students will apply a broad understanding of host-pathogen interactions and the basic mechanisms of disease progression to assess the short and long-term impact of pathogenesis to the health of animals, their caretakers, and consumers. Lectures will be followed by active discussion of selected readings. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 511). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 511 and AN SC 411. Prerequisite: (IMIN 200 or equivalent) and consent of instructor.
AN SC 420 Carcass and Meat Quality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). The conversion of muscle to meat in livestock and poultry: definitions and measurement of carcass and meat quality; influences of pre- and post-slaughter factors on carcass and meat quality. The lab will consist of a two day field trip during Reading Week. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 521). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 521 and AN SC 420. Prerequisite: *3 Biochemistry or AN SC 320, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 461 Ruminant Digestion, Metabolism, and Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Integration of theory and practical concepts in ruminant nutrition, digestion and metabolism through topics such as energy flow in ruminants, protein systems and net feed efficiency. Laboratories will involve formulation of rations for various physiological states of beef and dairy cattle, economical rations, feed mixes, protein systems (degradable and undegradable protein systems) and net feed efficiency formulations. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 561). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 561 and AN SC 461. Prerequisite: AN SC 260 or *3 NUTR.
AN SC 462 Swine Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Nutrient utilization and requirements, feed ingredients, and applied feeding programs for swine. Feed formulation strategies and current topics in swine nutrition will be discussed in detail. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 562). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 562 and AN SC 462. Prerequisite: AN SC 260, *3 NUTR or NU FS 305. Corequisite: AN SC 311 or *6 Physiology or consent of Instructor.
AN SC 463 Poultry Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Nutritional requirements, feeding programs and feed ingredients used for poultry. Feed formulation strategies and current topics in poultry nutrition will be discussed extensively. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 563). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 515, 563 and AN SC 463. Prerequisite: AN SC 260, *3 NUTR or NU FS 305. Corequisite: AN SC 311 or *6 Physiology or consent of Instructor.
AN SC 464 Companion Animal Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Aimed at fourth year undergraduate students with an interest in companion animal nutrition. The course will focus on nutrient utilization and requirements of dogs, cats, and horses. Other companion animal species (mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, amphibians, etc.) will also be covered. Current issues in pet food nutrition and manufacture will be discussed. Prerequisite: AN SC 260, *3NUTR or NU FS 305.
AN SC 471 Applied Poultry Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Study of avian anatomy, physiology, behavior, and health as it relates to modern poultry production. Current management practices to optimize production efficiency and animal well-being are examined. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 571). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 571 and AN SC 471. Prerequisite: AN SC 200, 260 and 310, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 472 Applied Dairy Production Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Examination of the structure of the dairy industry, evaluation of management practices to optimize production efficiency and animal well-being, and integration of nutritional, physiological, and biochemical processes involved in production of quality milk. Laboratories emphasize practical applications, field trips, and discussion. Prerequisite: AN SC 200, 260 and 310, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 474 Applied Beef Cattle Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Examination of current and potential future production and management practices to optimize production efficiency and animal well-being in the Canadian and international beef industry. Laboratories emphasize practical applications, field trips, and discussion. Intended for undergraduate students. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 574). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 574 and AN SC 474. Prerequisite: AN SC 200, 260 and 310, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 476 Applied Swine Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Evaluation of swine breeding, feeding, housing management, and disease prevention practices that optimize production efficiency and animal well-being. Laboratories involve analysis of production practices with a view to optimizing efficiency. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 576). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 576 and AN SC 476. Prerequisite: AN SC 200, 260 and 310, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 479 Integrative Project in Animal Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-3). A team-based capstone course exploring broad areas of animal agriculture. Students will work in groups with mentors on a project involving experiential learning and skill development related to the field. Open only to fourth-year students in BSc Agriculture, Animal Science Major.
AN SC 484 Animal Molecular Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Lecture and discussion course dealing with concepts in gene expression, gene manipulation, and application of molecular biology to animal biotechnology. Prerequisites: BIOL 207 or BIOCH 200, or consent of instructor.
AN SC 485 Animal Genetic Improvement =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-2). Application of genetic/genomic principles and methods to the improvement of livestock and poultry. Topics include Mendelian inheritance, basic concepts of quantitative genetics/genomics, definitions of genetic parameters, principles and methods for genetic evaluation, prediction of genetic change and application of mating systems. Credit will only be given for one of AN SC 385 and 485. Offered in even numbered years. Prerequisite: BIOL 207.
AN SC 496 Research on the Human Animal Bond Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Exploration of research methods and measures; critical appraisal of research on the human-animal bond; application of research findings to the improvement of human and animal welfare. Students will conduct library and empirical research in the laboratory component. Prerequisites: AN SC 378 or (*90 and consent of instructor).
AN SC 499 Integrative Project in Animal Health Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-3). A team-based capstone course exploring broad areas of animal health. Students will work in groups with mentors on a project involving experiential learning and skill development related to the field. Open only to fourth-year students in BSc Animal Health Program.
#
Anthropology
ANTHR
Department of Anthropology Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
ANTHR 101 Introductory Anthropology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to past and present anthropological approaches through the study of human diversity.
ANTHR 110 Gender, Age, and Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An anthropological review and comparison of cultures in terms of social positions based on differences in sex and age.
ANTHR 150 Race and Racism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The challenge of racism in modern societies and the response of anthropology, including the history of how the ‘race’ concept has been used to explain human variation.
ANTHR 206 Introduction to Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Introduction to the nature, purposes, theory and methods of anthropological archaeology. Emphasis on principles of reconstruction of past societies from archaeological evidence and the explanation of cultural evolution.
ANTHR 207 Introduction to Social and Cultural Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Comparative study of human society and culture, particularly non-Western communities, with special attention to the family, social structure, economics and political institutions, and religion; processes of change.
ANTHR 208 Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The anthropological study of language and communication. A brief survey of field and analytical methods and the theory of linguistic anthropology.
ANTHR 209 Introduction to Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Survey of theory and basic data in human evolution and human variation. Topics include primatology, osteology, hominoid paleontology, variation in modern populations.
ANTHR 219 World Prehistory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the archaeological evidence for human cultural evolution.
ANTHR 230 Anthropology of Science, Technology, and Environment =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Science as a cultural practice, cultural effects and globalization of technology, changing views of nature, gender and science, traditional ecological knowledge, and the evolution of technology.
ANTHR 235 Anthropology of Disability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Cultural variations in experiences and understandings of disability, as well as anthropological ways of analyzing and discussing disability. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 256 Alberta Archaeology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to Alberta’s past as reconstructed by archaeology.
ANTHR 286 Topics in Regional Anthropology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Consult the Department and/or the schedule of classes for the specific topics offered. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
ANTHR 287 Topics in Asian Anthropology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Consult the Department and/or the schedule of classes for the specific topics offered. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
ANTHR 302 History of Anthropological Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major theoretical trends in social and cultural anthropology in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Prerequisites: ANTHR 207 or 208 (or ANTHE 207 or 208) or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in ANTHR 415.
ANTHR 303 History of Anthropological Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the development of theory and method in anthropological archaeology. Prerequisites: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years. Note: Not open to students with credit in ANTHR 481.
ANTHR 304 History of Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the development of theory and method in biological anthropology. Prerequisites: ANTHR 209 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years. Not open to students with credit in ANTHR 498.
ANTHR 310 The Anthropology of Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A comparative cross-cultural, and cross-species perspective on biological and social aspects of sex and gender differences. Prerequisites: ANTHR 110 or 207 (or ANTHE 207) or 209 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 311 North American Prehistory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of prehistory and cultural development in North America. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 312 Lower Palaeolithic Prehistory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of prehistoric culture in Europe, Africa and Asia during the Lower Palaeolithic. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 313 Middle and Upper Palaeolithic Prehistory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of prehistoric culture in Europe, Africa, and Asia during the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 318 Political Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to modern political anthropology with emphasis on origins of state structure, relations between non-state and state societies, and problems of pluralism and stratification. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 320 Anthropology of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of anthropological approaches to religions and related phenomena including magic, taboo, shamanism and witchcraft. Emphasis on the connection between religious ideas and practices and other aspects of social life in a variety of cultures. Prerequisite: ANTHR 207 (or ANTHE 207) or consent of Department.
ANTHR 321 Religions of China in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary Chinese religious culture as practices in the family, community, voluntary associations, and the political sphere. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 324 Economic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the literature and controversies within the field, emphasizing systems of exchange. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 332 Anthropology of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary views of the nature of science, including debates about science’s universalism, objectives, and culture-bound epistemologies. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 350 Kinship and Social Structure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Anthropological approaches to kinship systems and other concepts of social organization, emphasizing non-western societies. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 372 Anthropology of Food Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the relationship between food and culture through historical and cross-cultural analysis of foodways. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 385 Topics in Social Cultural Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 386 Topics in Biological Anthropology or Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 390 Human Osteology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Lecture and laboratory study of human skeletal biology, emphasizing the identification of bones and an understanding of human functional anatomy. Prerequisite: ANTHR 209 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 391 Hominid Evolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the fossil evidence for human evolution. Prerequisite: ANTHR 209 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 393 Health and Healing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A cross-cultural study through time of the beliefs and social activities associated with health, illness and healing.
ANTHR 396 Archaeological Field Training Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Instruction in all practical aspects of archaeological field techniques, including excavation, survey, recording, photography, and conservation. This course can be applied to the Canadian content requirement when held at a Canadian site. Prerequisites: ANTHR 206 or equivalent, and consent of Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ANTHR 397 Anthropological Field Training =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Practical aspects of field training in socio- cultural anthropology. Prerequisite: ANTHR 207 or equivalent, and consent of Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ANTHR 401 Ethnographic Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of issues in methodology and field methods. Restricted to senior undergraduate students. Prerequisite: ANTHR 207 (or ANTHE 207) or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 404 Mortuary Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theory and method applied to the interpretation of treatment of the dead in prehistoric and historic contexts. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or 209, or consent of Department.
ANTHR 407 Paleopathology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). A detailed survey of disease processes in antiquity as expressed in skeletal and preserved tissues. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 417 Anthropology of Modernity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The course investigates recent works that theorize modernity (globalization, transnationalism, the impact of new technologies) from an ethnographic perspective. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 420 Anthropology and the Twentieth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between the development of anthropological theory across the twentieth century and the emergence of “new social movement” organized around anti-colonialism, anti-racism, feminism, ethnicity, the environment, gender, sexuality, disability, and identity. Prerequisite: ANTHR 207 (or ANTHE 207) or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 424 Visual Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to visual media and visualization in the creation, reproduction and comprehension of culture over time, and the use of imagery in describing the anthropological subject. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 443 Juvenile Osteology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Study of the juvenile skeleton, treating development and identification of juvenile skeletal elements. Other topics include the theory and practice of determining juvenile age at death and the study of juvenile health and childrearing practices in past populations using skeletal remains. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390, or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 460 Nutritional Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Interrelationship between food, culture and biology from local and global perspectives. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 464 Chemical Analysis of Bone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Survey of current research on the stable isotope and aDNA analysis of archaeological human and faunal remains. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390, or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 468 Fundamentals of Archaeological Mapping Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Archaeological mapping and spatial analysis, including non-digital and digital forms. Students will learn the theoretical foundations of mapping as well as learn how to use mapping technology and software. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 469 Dental Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of methodological and theoretical issues in dental anthropology through study of human teeth from archaeological contexts. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 471 Readings in Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual research project conducted under the direction of a Department faculty member. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ANTHR 472 Independent Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Individual research project involving significant laboratory work conducted under the direction of a Department faculty member. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ANTHR 476 Palaeodietary Reconstruction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Survey of methods used to reconstruct past human diets, with an emphasis on those that involve the study of human remains. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or 209 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 477 Northwest Coast Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The examination of the long-term human occupation of the coastal areas from southeast Alaska to northern California. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 480 Zooarchaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Exploration of methodological and theoretical issues in zooarchaeology through the study of animal remains from archaeological contexts. Prerequisite: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 484 Topics in Archaeology and/or Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 485 Topics in Social, Cultural and/or Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 486 Seminar in Archaeology and/or Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 487 Seminar in Social, Cultural and/or Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department for the specific topics offered and any recommended courses to be completed prior to registering.
ANTHR 490 Human Osteoarchaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The analysis and interpretation of data obtained from human skeletal and dental remains from archaeological sites. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 491 Stone Tools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A methodological and theoretical introduction to the analysis of stone tools. Prerequisites: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 494 Forensic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Human skeletal individualization and its application to human death investigation. Prerequisite: ANTHR 390 or 490 or consent of Department.
ANTHR 495 Archaeological Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of archaeological theory and methods to field and laboratory problems. Prerequisites: ANTHR 206 or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 499 Honors Seminar and Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). A review and discussion of contemporary issues in Anthropology leading to the conception, preparation, and completion of the BA Honors essay under the supervision of an individual faculty member.
Graduate Courses
ANTHR 500 MA Thesis Prospectus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of a research proposal leading to the MA thesis. The prospectus will state the proposed research problem, and demonstrate the theoretical and methodological knowledge required to complete the research. Closed to web registration. Department consent required.
ANTHR 501 MA Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Readings, presentations, and discussions of staff research, recent advances and current issues in the four fields of anthropology. Limited to new MA students
ANTHR 511 Ethnographic Field Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Not open to students with credit in ANTHR 401 or 505. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 517 Anthropology of Modernity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Investigates recent works that theorize modernity (globalization, transnationalism, the impact of new technologies) from an ethnographic perspective. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 520 Anthropology and the Twentieth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between the development of anthropological theory across the twentieth century and the emergence of “new social movements” organized around anti-colonialism, anti-racism, feminism, ethnicity, the environment, gender, sexuality, disability, and identity. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 521 Topics in Medical Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the University timetable for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 524 Visual Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to visual media and visualization in the creation, reproduction and comprehension of culture over time, and the use of imagery in describing the anthropological subject. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 543 Advanced Juvenile Osteology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Study of the juvenile skeleton, treating development and identification of juvenile skeletal elements. Other topics include the theory and practice of determining juvenile age at death and the study of juvenile health and childrearing practices in past populations using skeletal remains. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 560 Advanced Nutritional Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced seminar on the interrelationship between food, culture and biology from local and global perspectives. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 564 Advanced Chemical Analysis of Bone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of current research on the stable isotope and aDNA analysis of archaeological human and faunal remains. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 568 Advanced Fundamentals of Archaeological Mapping Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers the basics of archaeological mapping and spatial analysis, including non-digital and digital forms. Students will learn the theoretical foundations of mapping as well as learn how to use mapping technology and software. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 569 Advanced Dental Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of methodological and theoretical issues in dental anthropology through study of human teeth from archaeological contexts. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 571 Advanced Readings in Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual research project conducted under the direction of a Department faculty member. Closed to web registration. Department consent required.
ANTHR 572 Independent Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Individual research project involving significant laboratory or field work conducted under the supervision of a Department faculty member. Closed to web registration. Department consent required.
ANTHR 573 Advanced Field Training =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Aspects of fieldwork in anthropology. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ANTHR 576 Advanced Palaeodietary Reconstruction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced survey of methods used to reconstruct past human diets, with an emphasis on those that involve the study of human remains. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 577 Advanced Northwest Coast Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The examination of the long-term human occupation of the coastal areas from southeast Alaska to northern California. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 580 Advanced Zooarchaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Exploration of methodological and theoretical issues in zooarchaeology through the study of animal remains from archaeological contexts. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 584 Advanced Topics in Archaeology and/or Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the schedule of classes for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 585 Advanced Topics in Social, Cultural and/or Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the University timetable for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 586 Advanced Seminar in Archaeology and/or Biological Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the schedule of classes for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 587 Advanced Seminar in Social, Cultural and/or Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the University timetable for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 589 Advanced Seminar in Linguistic Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consult the Department and/or the University timetable for the specific topics offered.
ANTHR 591 Advanced Study of Stone Tools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A methodological and theoretical introduction to the analysis of stone tools. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 593 Evolution and Social Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current perspectives on human biological, social and cultural evolution. Offered in alternate years.
ANTHR 598 Landscape and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Cultural experiences and representations of landscape.
ANTHR 600 PhD Thesis Prospectus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of a research proposal leading to the PhD thesis. The prospectus states the proposed research problem, and demonstrates the theoretical and methodological knowledge required to complete the research. Closed to web registration. Department consent required.
ANTHR 601 PhD Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Readings, presentations, and discussions of staff research, recent advances and current issues in the four fields of anthropology. Limited to new PhD students. Optional for students with credit in ANTHR 501
#
Arabic
ARAB
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background.
Students with an Arabic language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
Undergraduate Courses
ARAB 111 Beginners’ Arabic I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to pronunciation, reading, writing, and conversation for students who have not been exposed to conversational Arabic. Note: not to be taken by students with Arabic 35 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Not open to students with credit in ARAB 112, 113, 114.
ARAB 112 Beginners’ Arabic II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Continuation of ARAB 111. Prerequisite: ARAB 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students who have been exposed to conversational Arabic, or those with native or near native proficiency in reading and writing, or Arabic 35 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Not open to students with credit in ARAB 113, 114.
ARAB 113 Beginners’ Arabic I for Heritage Learners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to pronunciation, reading, writing, and conversation for students who have been exposed to conversational Arabic, but have no formal training in spoken or written modern standard Arabic (MSA). Note: not to be taken by students with Arabic 35 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Not open to students with credit in ARAB 111, 112, 114.
ARAB 114 Beginners’ Arabic II for Heritage Learners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Continuation of ARAB 113. Prerequisite: ARAB 113 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or Arabic 35 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Not open to students with credit in ARAB 112.
ARAB 211 Intermediate Arabic I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Continuation of ARAB 112, emphasizing building an extensive vocabulary in everyday situations. Prerequisite: ARAB 112 or consent of Department. Note: not open to students with credit in ARAB 301 or 302.
ARAB 212 Intermediate Arabic II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Exercises in comprehension, translation and composition. Further study of grammar. Prerequisite: ARAB 211 or consent of Department. Note: not open to students with credit in ARAB 301 or 302.
#
Art
ART
Department of Art and Design Faculty of Arts
Note: Because presence at lectures and seminars, participation in classroom discussion, and the completion of assignments are important components of most courses, regular attendance is expected.
This applies particularly to studio courses where attendance is a factor in grading.
Students are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite course(s) with a minimum averaged grade of B. Registration may be withheld in cases where the averaged grade in a prerequisite course is below B. Bachelor of Fine Arts and Bachelor of Design students in Art and Design have priority registration in all Art and Design studio courses. Registration in remaining spaces is based upon academic performance in required prerequisite courses.
Undergraduate Courses
ART 134 Art Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based exploration of both visual and conceptual Fine Art concerns in two- and three-dimensions. Note: ART 134 and DES 135 are required prerequisites for senior level ART or DES courses. Not open to students with credit in ART 131 or 132.
ART 136 Art Fundamentals I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based exploration of both visual and conceptual Fine Art concerns in two- and three-dimensions. Note: Restricted to BFA and BDes students.
ART 137 Art Fundamentals II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further study of studio-based exploration of both visual and conceptual Fine Art concerns in two- and three-dimensions. Note: Restricted to BFA and BDes students. Prerequisite: ART 136.
ART 240 Drawing I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the principles and techniques of drawing. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in ART 140.
ART 310 Painting: Introductory Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the principles, concepts, and techniques of painting. Projects based on observation with reference to both historical and contemporary examples. Acrylic medium. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department.
ART 311 Painting: Introductory Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Continued exploration of the principles, concepts and techniques of painting. Projects based on observation with reference to both historical and contemporary examples. Oil medium. Prerequisites: ART 310 and consent of Department.
ART 322 Printmaking: Introductory Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the principles and technical applications of printmaking. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department. Normally ART 323 must be taken in the same academic year.
ART 323 Printmaking: Introductory Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Continued exploration of the principles and technical applications of printmaking with the introduction of new techniques. Prerequisites: ART 322 and consent of Department. Normally ART 322 must be taken in the same academic year. Not open to students with credit in ART 322 (*6) offered prior to 2012-13.
ART 337 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Introductory Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department.
ART 338 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Introductory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department
ART 340 Drawing II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Development and application of techniques and concepts of drawing with emphasis on drawing from the life model. Prerequisite: ART 140 or ART 240 and consent of department.
ART 361 Sculpture: Introductory Studies in Abstract Sculpture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Foundation studies in abstract sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135, or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department. Corequisite: Normally ART 362, to be taken in the same academic year.
ART 362 Sculpture: Introductory Studies in Figurative Sculpture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Foundation studies in figurative sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135, or ART 136 and DES 138, and consent of Department. Corequisite: Normally ART 361, to be taken in the same academic year.
ART 410 Painting: Intermediate Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). A project based course exploring principles, concepts and techniques of painting. Prerequisites: ART 310, 311 and consent of Department.
ART 411 Painting: Intermediate Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further study of advanced principles, concepts and techniques of painting, leading to self-initiated projects. Prerequisites: ART 410 and consent of Department.
ART 422 Printmaking: Intermediate Studies I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Study of the principles and technical applications of printmaking with an emphasis on lithography and etching. Prerequisites: ART 322 and ART 323 and consent of Department.
ART 425 Word and Image: Intermediate Projects in Printmaking for Artists and Designers Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of the multiple relationships between word and image generated through consideration of text. Prerequisite: ART 322. Corequisite: ART 422. Note: ART 425 and DES 425 will be taught in conjunction. Registration priority given to BDesign Printmaking Route students registering in DES 425. Not open to students who have successfully completed DES 425.
ART 437 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Intermediate Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ART 438 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Intermediate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ART 439 Special Projects in Drawing: Intermediate Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisites: ART 340, or 339 and consent of Department.
ART 440 Drawing: Intermediate Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Further study and application of the techniques and concepts of drawing. Prerequisite: ART 340 and consent of department.
ART 441 Drawing: Intermediate Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further study and application of the techniques and concepts of drawing. Prerequisite: ART 440 and consent of department.
ART 465 Sculpture: Intermediate Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Intermediate studies in sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 361 and 362 and/or consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 462 (*6).
ART 466 Sculpture: Intermediate Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Intermediate studies in sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 465 and consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 462 (*6).
ART 467 Sculpture: Intermediate Studies III Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Further intermediate studies in sculpture. Pre or corequisites: ART 465 and 466 and/or consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 463 (*6).
ART 468 Sculpture: Intermediate Studies IV Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further intermediate studies in sculpture. Pre or corequisites: ART 465 and 466 and/or consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 463 (*6).
ART 510 Painting: Advanced Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Individual directed study in a studio/workshop environment. Prerequisites: ART 411 and consent of Department.
ART 511 Painting: Advanced Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Individual directed study in a studio/workshop environment. Prerequisites: ART 510 or 516 and/or consent of Department.
ART 516 Painting: Advanced Studies III Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Individual directed study in a studio/workshop environment. Prerequisites: ART 411 and consent of Department.
ART 517 Painting: Advanced Studies IV Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Individual directed study in a studio/workshop environment. Prerequisites: ART 510 or 516 and/or consent of Department.
ART 522 Printmaking: Advanced Studies I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Advanced study of the principles and technical applications of printmaking emphasizing mixed media and photographic techniques. Prerequisites: ART 422 and consent of Department.
ART 524 Printmaking: Advanced Studies III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Advanced individual study of drawing and other image-making processes and their application in printmaking. Pre- or corequisites: ART 522 and consent of Department.
ART 525 Word and Image: Advanced Projects in Printmaking for Artists and Designers Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of the multiple relationships between word and image generated through consideration of text. Prerequisite: ART 422 and ART 425. Corequisite: ART 522. Note: ART 525 and DES 525 are taught in conjunction. Registration priority given to BDesign Printmaking Route students registering in DES 525. Not open to students who have successfully completed DES 525.
ART 537 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Advanced Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ART 538 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Advanced Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ART 539 Special Projects in Drawing: Advanced Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in Spring/Summer. Prerequisites: ART 439, or ART 440 and 441, and consent of Department.
ART 540 Drawing/Intermedia: Advanced Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Study of the principles and concepts of Drawing and Intermedia. Prerequisite: ART 440 and 441 and consent of department.
ART 541 Drawing/Intermedia: Advanced Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Study of the principles and concepts of Drawing and Intermedia. Prerequisite: ART 540 and consent of department.
ART 565 Sculpture: Advanced Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Advanced studies in sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 465 and 466 and consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 562 (*6).
ART 566 Sculpture: Advanced Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Advanced studies in sculpture. Prerequisites: ART 565 and consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 562 (*6).
ART 567 Sculpture: Advanced Studies III Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Further advanced studies in sculpture. Pre or corequisites: ART 565 and 566 and/or consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 563 (*6).
ART 568 Sculpture: Advanced Studies IV Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further advanced studies in sculpture. Pre or corequisites: ART 565 and 566 and/or consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in ART 563 (*6).
Graduate Courses
ART 612 Painting: Concepts, Analysis, and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 613 Painting: Development of Concepts, Analysis, and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 622 Printmaking: Concepts, Analysis, and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 623 Printmaking: Development of Concepts, Analysis and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 630 Seminar in Related Disciplines Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
ART 640 Drawing/Intermedia: Concepts, Analysis and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 641 Drawing/Intermedia: Development of Concepts, Analysis and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 662 Sculpture: Concepts, Analysis, and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
ART 663 Sculpture: Development of Concepts, Analysis, and Criticism Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-18L-0).
#
Art History
ART H
Department of Art and Design Faculty of Arts
Note: Please see History of Art, Design and Visual Culture (HADVC) effective Fall 2017.
Undergraduate Courses
ART H 249 Visual Culture and Advertising Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of visual advertising practices from the late 19th century to the present.
#
Astronomy
ASTRO
Department of Physics Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
ASTRO 120 Astronomy of the Solar System =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development of astronomy and astronomical techniques, including results obtained from the latest orbiting observatories. The origin, evolution and nature of the Earth, the other planets and non-planetary bodies will be discussed. Viewing experience will be available using the campus observatory. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1 and Physics 30.
ASTRO 122 Astronomy of Stars and Galaxies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development of our understanding of the universe, including current models of stellar evolution and cosmology. Emphasis on understanding the physical processes underlying astronomical phenomena. Viewing experience will be available using the campus observatory. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1 and Physics 30.
ASTRO 320 Stellar Astrophysics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of physics to stellar formation and stellar evolution; theoretical models and observational comparisons of main sequence stars, white dwarf stars, neutron stars, supernovae, black holes; binary star systems, stellar atmospheres and stellar spectra. Prerequisites: MATH 115, 118, or 146, and one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Pre or corequisite: any 200-level PHYS course. Some additional knowledge of astronomy (ASTRO 120 and/or 122) is advantageous.
ASTRO 322 Galactic and Extragalactic Astrophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The interstellar medium and interstellar reddening; galactic structure; kinematics and dynamics of stars in galaxies; quasars; introduction of cosmology. Prerequisites: MATH 115, 118, or 146, and one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130, and PHYS 208 or 271. Previous knowledge of astronomy is advantageous. ASTRO 320 is strongly recommended.
ASTRO 429 Upper Atmosphere and Space Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic space plasma phenomena: the Earth’s plasma and field environment; the solar cycle; generation of the solar wind; the interplanetary plasma and field environment; the solar-terrestrial interaction; magnetospheric substorms; the aurora borealis; magnetosphere-ionosphere interactions; effects of magnetospheric storms on man-made systems; use of natural electromagnetic fields for geophysical exploration. Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 381.
ASTRO 430 Physical Cosmology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Observational cosmology; geometry and matter content of the Universe; physical processes in the early stages of the Universe; inflation, Big Bang nucleosynthesis and the cosmic microwave background radiation; cosmological aspects of galaxy formation and the growth of large-scale structure. Prerequisites: PHYS 310, MATH 334. Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 458.
ASTRO 465 Stellar Astrophysics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Stellar interiors and nuclear transformations; energy transport; model stars; variable stars; stellar evolution. Prerequisites: PHYS 310, 271, ASTRO 320, MATH 334. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of ASTRO 465 or ASTRO 565.
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for credit by graduate students: ASTRO 429, 430, 465; PHYS 415, 420, 472, 481, 485, 499.
ASTRO 565 Stellar Astrophysics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Stellar interiors and nuclear transformations; energy transport; model stars; variable stars; stellar evolution. Prerequisites: Consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of ASTRO 465 or ASTRO 565.
#
Augustana Faculty - Accounting
AUACC
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUACC 311 Introductory Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Postulates, principles, the accounting cycle, capital and income measurement, financial statement preparation and analysis; emphasis on reporting to shareholders, creditors, and other external decision makers. Prerequisites: AUECO 101, 102, and basic familiarity with microcomputer applications.
AUACC 322 Managerial Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to help managers assess needed information to carry out three essential functions in an organization: planning operations, controlling activities, and making decisions. The emphasis of this course is on cost behaviors, various product costing methods, cost-volume-profit relationships, budgeting and control through standard costs, and other quantitative techniques used by management. Prerequisite: AUACC 311.
#
Augustana Faculty - Art
AUART
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUART 101 Introduction to the History of Art I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of art from the Prehistoric Age to the end of the Renaissance.
AUART 102 Introduction to the History of Art II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of art from the Renaissance to the present.
AUART 103 Caves to Skyscrapers: The Built Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of the built environment from the Prehistoric age to the present.
AUART 111 Studio Foundation I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Art-making is explored with basic techniques in drawing and color media. The visual language of perception and expression is introduced using principles of composition. Aesthetic and psychological principles of visual organization are applied to elements of line, shape, colour, and texture.
AUART 112 Studio Foundation II - 3-D and Colour Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Further exploration of art-making in two and three dimensions. Visual structure is investigated expressively and technically in sculpture processes and paint media. Development of personal creativity and a basis for compositional analysis are included. Prerequisite: AUART 111, or Art 30 equivalence with consent of the instructor (based on portfolio submission). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUART 112 and 113.
AUART 215 Sculpture I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to principles of composition and practice in 3-dimensional art. Historical and contemporary issues are explored. Prerequisite: Second year standing. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 221 Nineteenth-Century Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of modern art in Europe during the nineteenth century with emphasis on major movements, concepts, and innovators.
AUART 222 Art of the Twentieth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the practices and concepts of art during the twentieth century. Includes an introduction to a range of art and architecture, as well as a variety of critical and theoretical interpretations of art. Central focus is on the development of a modernist mainstream during this century and its relation to the ideas of post-modernism.
AUART 223 Canadian Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the visual arts in Canada, from the indigenous beginnings to the present, with emphasis on the twentieth century.
AUART 224 Art and Its Histories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of works, movements, theories and institutions of art with an emphasis on contemporary art and recent approaches to the study and analysis of art works. It examines painting, sculpture, architecture, photography, graphic and applied art.
AUART 228 Art Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Art studies. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in an Art degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Art that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be received for only one of AUART 228, AUHIS 285, AUPHI 228, AUREL 228.
AUART 231 Drawing I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introductory course that develops basic skills of perception and recording as they apply to the practice of drawing. Historical and contemporary practices are explored primarily on the basis of direct observation of still life, landscape, and architecture. Issues in composition, expression, critical analysis, and technique using monochromatic media are included. Prerequisite: Second year standing, or Art 30, or consent of the instructor (based on portfolio submission). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 232 Drawing II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Further exploration of drawing practice with the application of observational and conceptual skills to issues of expression and composition. Figure drawing, including anatomy, perceptual considerations, and the expressive potential of the human figure, is introduced. The use of colour media, the development of a personal aesthetic response, as well as critical analysis are included. Prerequisite: Second year standing. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 260 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Art History possibly, but not necessarily, linked to a course that would later visit sites of art and visual culture. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUART 260 or AUCLA 193, 293.
AUART 261 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Art History possibly, but not necessarily, linked to a course that would later visit sites of art and visual culture.
AUART 262 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Art History possibly, but not necessarily, linked to a course that would later visit sites of art and visual culture.
AUART 265 Selected Topics in Art History Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable in 3 weeks). Tour course following the selected topics course to which it is linked. The tour visits art sites discussed in that course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 266 Selected Topics in Art History Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable in 3 weeks). Tour course following the selected topics course to which it is linked. The tour visits art sites discussed in that course. Prerequisite: The appropriate linked course from the AUART 260 - 264 series.
AUART 267 Selected Topics in Art History Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable in 3 weeks). Tour course following the selected topics course to which it is linked. The tour visits art sites discussed in that course. Prerequisite: The appropriate linked course from the AUART 260 - 264 series.
AUART 271 Painting I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Painting from the ground up. The course introduces painting technique and colour usage in acrylic and/or oil media. Perceptual and conceptual problems are based on historical and contemporary practices with an emphasis on personal creativity. Critical analysis of art is a component. Prerequisites: Second year standing. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 272 Painting II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Further exploration of painting practice using oil and acrylic painting techniques. Critical analysis is included. Varieties of conceptual contexts and individual expressive directions are investigated. Prerequisite: AUART 271 or consent of the instructor (based on portfolio submission). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 287 Topics in Late Seventeenth- and Eighteenth-Century Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Consideration of various topics in seventeenth and eighteenth century European art. Its focus is on the study of themes, ideas and methodologies pertaining to the visual culture of the period, rather than a chronological survey.
AUART 289 Studies in Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in the history of visual culture that are organized thematically rather than by period, nationality or style. Prerequisite: Second-year standing.
AUART 298 Selected Topics in Art Studio Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Selected topics in art studio practice that are theme or media based. Prerequisite: Second year standing. Notes: AUART 298 does not count towards any major or minor in Art.
AUART 299 Selected Topics in Art Studio Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Selected topics in art studio practice that are theme or media specific. Prerequisite: Second year standing. Notes: AUART 299 does not count towards any major or minor in Art.
AUART 331 Drawing III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Intermediate drawing further develops techniques and concepts of drawing with a focus on contemporary practices leading to self- initiated projects. Prerequisite: AUART 231. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 365 Aesthetics and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Considerations of theoretical issues related to visual arts, broadly understood B painting, television, video, film, advertising, and photography. Classical theories of nature of the visual experience, as well as modern and postmodern theories and critiques. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUART 365 and AUPHI 365.
AUART 366 Representations of Place and Space Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of concepts and representations in art, architecture, literature and philosophy, of place and space from the Renaissance to the present. Prerequisite: None, but a course in Art history, Philosophy, Geography, or Canadian literature would be helpful. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUART 366 and AUPHI 366.
AUART 371 Painting III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Intermediate painting further develops techniques and concepts of painting with a focus on contemporary practices leading to self- initiated projects. Prerequisite: AUART 272. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUART 380 Directed Reading in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Individual study project for the advanced art history student. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUART 381 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in art history and visual culture. Prerequisite: Any 200-level Art history course or consent of the instructor.
AUART 382 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in art history and visual culture. Prerequisite: Any 200-level Art history course or consent of the instructor.
AUART 383 Selected Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in art history and visual culture. Prerequisite: Any 200-level Art history course or consent of the instructor.
AUART 411 Visual Explorations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6s-0). Advanced studies in a studio discipline with individualized programs designed in collaboration with the instructor. Direction is guided by issues in contemporary practice and thought. Prerequisites: AUART 331 and one of 215, 371.
AUART 421 Art History Stream Capstone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course will focus on selected themes in art history and visual studies. Emphasis is on the production of either a text-based project, or a combination of a text-based and practice-based project into a single body of work. Prerequisites: AUART 224 and *6 in senior Art History with at least *3 at the 300-level.
AUART 480 Directed Reading in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Individual study project for the highly advanced art history student. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUART 490 Directed Project in Visual Explorations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1L-0). Individual study course for the highly advanced studio art student. A selected theme in two- or three-dimensional expression is explored intensively. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Biology
AUBIO
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUBIO 108 Introduction to Marine Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to the diversity of marine ecosystems and the adaptations of marine organisms to their environment. Notes: The course does not count toward the major, concentration, or minor in Biology. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program.
AUBIO 111 Integrative Biology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to functional and developmental biology from molecules to systems, focusing on how organisms integrate different levels of organization in order to live and reproduce. This course covers key topics of biochemistry (metabolism, respiration, photosynthesis), molecular biology (replication, transcription, translation), cell biology (organelles, membranes, cell cycle), physiology (gas exchange, circulation, locomotion) and development (fertilisation, gastrulation, differentiation). Prerequisites: Biology 30 and Chemistry 30. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 111 and 130 (2014).
AUBIO 112 Integrative Biology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the biology of organisms, focusing on the evolution of biological diversity, including the mechanisms responsible for evolutionary change and the adaptations associated with the evolution of the major groups of organisms. Prerequisites: AUBIO 111 or AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 112 and 110 (2014).
AUBIO 210 Biological Science and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the biological sciences. Prerequisite: Second- year standing in a Biology or Environmental degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Biology that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 210, AUCHE 210, AUENV 210 and AUGEO 210.
AUBIO 219 Research Experience in Biology Œ1.5 (fi 3) (variable, 0-0-3). Research experience in a faculty research project. Normally taken in addition to a full course load after the successful completion of at least *24 but not more than *60 in a program in the Augustana Faculty. Prerequisites: AUBIO 111 and 112 and consent of the Department. Notes: This course is offered on a pass/fail (credit/no-credit) basis. An “Application for Individual Study”, normally requiring a minimum GPA of 2.5 in Biology, must be completed and approved before registration in the course. Credit may be obtained twice.
AUBIO 230 Molecular Cell Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The composition, structure and function of cell membranes including membrane transport, cell signalling and cell-cell interactions. Protein sorting and cytoskeletal function is integrated with their membrane interactions. The social context of cells is also considered. Prerequisite: AUBIO 111. Corequisites: AUBIO 260; AUCHE 250.
AUBIO 253 Ecological Interactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An exploration of basic concepts and methods in ecology and of the relevance of ecological thinking in the life sciences. Emphasis is on interactions at the level of the organism, including physiological and evolutionary perspectives, and on their consequences on the composition and diversity of ecological communities. Prerequisite: AUBIO 110 (2014) or 112.
AUBIO 260 Principles of Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Mendelian inheritance and its cytological features including the molecular and cellular basis for the transmission of hereditary characteristics. Topics that are emphasized include microbial genetics, cytoplasmic inheritance, linkage and genetic mapping, DNA as genetic material, gene action, and the genetic code. Prerequisite: AUBIO 111.
AUBIO 274 Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the prokaryotic and eukaryotic members of the microbial world. Microbiological diversity will be examined by comparing cellular morphology, structure and metabolism. Topics include how to grow and study microbes, classification approaches and problems, control of microbial growth, pathogenesis and microbial ecology. Prerequisite: AUBIO 111 and 112.
AUBIO 280 Biochemistry: Proteins, Enzymes and Energy Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The structure and function of proteins and enzymes and the structure, function and metabolism of carbohydrates. The structure and function of lipids, nucleic acids, and amino acids are introduced. The course focuses on how enzymes catalyze the oxidation of carbohydrates and how the cell conserves this energy in a useful chemical form. Prerequisites: AUBIO 230 and AUCHE 250. Notes: Formerly part of AUBIO 380. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 280 and AUCHE 280.
AUBIO 318 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised library research project. Prerequisites: Third-year standing, *6 in Biology at the 200 level. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Biology. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUBIO 319 Directed Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised laboratory or field research project. Prerequisites: Third-year standing, *6 in Biology at the 200 level. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Biology. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUBIO 320 Plant Autecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of plant species’ population dynamics; interrelationships with biotic and abiotic components of the environment and ecophysiological adaptations. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253.
AUBIO 321 Plant Synecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Study of plant communities and their formation, maintenance, distribution, and interaction with the abiotic environment. Consideration is also given to plant succession, fire ecology, and global vegetation patterns. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253.
AUBIO 322 Economic Botany Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biological properties, geographical distribution, applications/utilization, and history of vascular and nonvascular plants economically important in agriculture, industry, and medicine. Prerequisites: AUBIO 110 or 111, and *6 of 200-level AUBIO. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 322 and AUENV 322.
AUBIO 323 Plant Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Comparative survey of the anatomy, morphology, function, life cycles, and evolutionary features of algae and non-vascular and vascular plants. Taxonomic and environmental considerations are also presented. Prerequisite: AUBIO 112. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 323 and AUBIO 222 (2014).
AUBIO 326 Drug Plants Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of historical and current use of important drug-producing plants. Evaluation of the chemistry and physiology of biologically active compounds from poisonous, analgesic, and hallucinogenic plants, and the current uses of such plant products. Use of plant biotechnology to develop drug-producing plants. Prerequisite: 200-level Biology course.
AUBIO 334 Field Studies in Environmental Science and Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). A 3-week field course that provides students an opportunity to develop skills in research and study design in the field of Environmental Science and Ecology. Students will live in a field camp to allow them to fully immerse themselves in their research projects, which could cover the range of ecology, botany, geography, environmental science, and/or environmental studies. Course content also includes instruction in key aspects of conservation biology and resource management. Prerequisites: AUSTA 215 and AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120 and one of AUGEO 218, AUGEO 230, AUENV 252, AUBIO 253. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 334, AUENV 334 and AUGEO 334.
AUBIO 336 Histology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Systematic and sequential consideration of fundamental cytology, the normal histology of the basic tissues, and the embryological development and microscopic organization of the major mammalian organs and organ systems. Emphasis is placed on the light- and electron-microscopic features of cells and tissues with direct correlation of structure and function. Prerequisites: AUBIO 230. Notes: AUBIO 395 is recommended as a pre or corequisite.
AUBIO 338 Developmental Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Development of complex organisms. Emphasis is on the interactions between cells and their environment that determine cell survival, gene activation and deactivation; and how specific cell and tissue structures and functions are selected. Developmental processes common to plants and animals are identified. Prerequisites: AUBIO 230 and 260; one of AUBIO 222 (2014), 294 (2014), 295 (2014), 323, 394, or 395; and third year standing.
AUBIO 341 Entomology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examination of the world of insects from the point of view of major areas of entomological study including life histories, taxonomy, phylogeny, physiology, development, morphology, and behaviour. Emphasis is given to the study of insects as animals, not as pests. Prerequisite: AUBIO 294.
AUBIO 343 Insect Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Relationships of insects to their environment, including the roles of insects in energy flow, biogeochemical cycling, and ecological succession. Evolutionary relationships also receive attention. Prerequisites: AUBIO 253 and 294.
AUBIO 350 Conservation Theory and Biodiversity in Tropical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Introduction to the basic concepts of conservation biology. The scope of conservation biology and levels of biodiversity are explored, as are aspects of tropical ecology related to conservation. Prerequisite: One of AUBIO 253, 294, or 295, and consent of the instructor(s) based on successful completion of the selection process. Note: This course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUBIO 459 or AUENV 459. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 350, 450, AUENV 350, 450.
AUBIO 351 Biogeography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Analysis of the spatial patterns of biotic systems and species. The course examines their past and present distribution patterns in the context of biological and ecological processes and human impacts. The course employs several methods of analysis, including geographic information systems. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 351 and AUGEO 351. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUBIO 354 Freshwater Ecology and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the biological, chemical and physical features of freshwater ecosystems, and how they relate to ecological processes in and adjacent to aquatic systems. The course will examine the role of ecological patterns in lakes, ponds, rivers and streams, with an emphasis on freshwater systems and their management in western Canada. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 354, AUENV 354, and AUGEO 354. The course requires participation in a field trip. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUBIO 355 Ecological Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses ecological processes at different spatial scales. Includes demography, population and meta-population dynamics of plants and animals across a broad range of ecosystems, community ecology and ecosystem functioning. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253.
AUBIO 371 Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the structure and function of the immune system. Topics will include the generation of B and T cell receptor diversity, antigens and antibodies, clonal selection and expansion, MHC restriction, self tolerance, cytokines and leukocyte trafficking. Discussion of infectious disease, vaccines, and immunity will be used to synthesize these topics into a unified conceptual framework. Prerequisites: AUBIO 274.
AUBIO 381 Biochemistry: Intermediary Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Structure, function, and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleic acids at the level of the cell and organs. Prerequisites: AUBIO 280 or 380 or AUCHE 280 or 380, and AUCHE 252. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 381 and AUCHE 381.
AUBIO 388 Biochemistry Laboratory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Laboratory course in biochemical techniques. Prerequisites: AUBIO 280 or AUCHE 280. Corequisites: AUBIO 381 or AUCHE 381.
AUBIO 389 Molecular Biology of the Gene Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of current knowledge and approaches in the area of structure, expression, and regulation of prokaryote and eukaryote genes. Topics include gene isolation and characterization, gene structure and replication, and transcription and translation processes and their regulation. Recombinant DNA technology and its applications are also introduced. Prerequisite: AUBIO 260.
AUBIO 390 Animal Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to key concepts and methods in animal behaviour. Both mechanistic and evolutionary points of view are considered. The student’s understanding of scientific thinking is deepened. Topics include instinct, learning, orientation, communication, mating and territoriality, foraging, and social behaviour. Prerequisite: AUBIO 112.
AUBIO 394 Comparative Invertebrate Zoology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Functional anatomy and life cycles of the major invertebrate taxa. Prerequisite: AUBIO 112. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 394 and AUBIO 294 (2014).
AUBIO 395 Vertebrate Form and Function Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Study of the structure, function, and diversity of vertebrates. Prerequisite: AUBIO 112. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 395 and AUBIO 295 (2014).
AUBIO 397 Vertebrate Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of the general concepts in animal physiology with an emphasis on structure and function and their adaptive significance to the animal in its environment. Physical, chemical, and functional aspects of animal cells and cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, osmoregulatory, endocrine, and nervous systems are considered. Bioelectric and contractility phenomena are also included. Prerequisites: AUBIO 230. Note: AUBIO 395 is recommended as a pre or corequisite.
AUBIO 411 History and Theory of Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of historical progression in the biological sciences and their associated development in relation to prevailing philosophical, social, and cultural contexts. Prerequisites: AUBIO 260; one of AUBIO 338, 438: one of AUBIO 323, 394, 395; fourth-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 411 and AUBIO 311.
AUBIO 412 Selected Topics in Biological Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of an advanced topic in Biology. Prerequisites: Vary according to topic; third-year standing.
AUBIO 413 Advanced Topics in Evolutionary Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of evolutionary processes in natural populations of plants and animals. Selected topics for lectures and seminars address contemporary questions about natural selection, adaptation, speciation, biogeography and the evolution of interaction among species. Prerequisites: AUBIO 253 and *3 of AUBIO at the 300 level or a cross-listed AUENV or AUGEO equivalent.
AUBIO 418 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised library research project. Prerequisites: Third-year standing, *6 in Biology at the 200 level. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Biology. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUBIO 419 Directed Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised laboratory or field research project. Prerequisites: Consent of the instructor. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Biology. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUBIO 438 Evolutionary Development Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative study of the developmental processes of different organisms in an attempt to determine their ancestral relationships and how developmental processes evolved. Topics include the origin and evolution of embryonic development; how modifications of development and developmental processes lead to the production of novel features; the role of developmental plasticity in evolution; the origin of biodiversity; and the developmental basis of homology. Prerequisites: AUBIO 338 or 389.
AUBIO 459 Field Studies in Tropical Ecology and Conservation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0 2 weeks field work). Field course that addresses problems of biodiversity and conservation in tropical environments. The student participates in field workshops, and designs and conducts their own field project to answer questions related to ecological and biological conservation. Prerequisite: AUBIO 350 or AUENV 350, and consent of the instructors based on successful completion of the selection process. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 459 and AUENV 459. Students who have received credit for AUBIO 359 or AUENV 359 may enrol in AUBIO 459 or AUENV 459 in a subsequent year based on successful completion of the selection process. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUBIO 475 Pathogenic Mechanisms of Microorganisms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examination of the pathogenic mechanisms used by bacteria, fungi, and protists that cause human diseases. Pathogens will be compared with a focus on the method of entry, colonization and invasion of host tissue used by various microbes and the microbial factors required to cause infection and disease. Epidemiological approaches, antimicrobials and antibiotic resistance will also be presented. Prerequisites: AUBIO 274.
AUBIO 485 Selected Topics in Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of biochemistry. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing in the Biology program; AUBIO 381 or AUCHE 381; and an additional *3 of AUBIO at the 300-level. Note: Credit may only be obtained for one of AUBIO 485 and AUCHE 485.
AUBIO 495 Mammalogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Diversity, natural history and adaptations of mammals to their environments. Prerequisites: AUBIO 295 (2014) or 395, or both of AUBIO 112 and AUENV 252.
#
Augustana Faculty - Chemistry
AUCHE
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUCHE 110 General Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A general introduction to chemistry. Topics include atomic structure; bonding and bonding theories; periodic trends; states of matter and intermolecular forces; and chemical kinetics. Prerequisites: Chemistry 30 and Mathematics 30-1.
AUCHE 112 General Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Continuation of AUCHE 110. Topics include thermodynamics, free energy, equilibria, acid-base chemistry, buffers, oxidation- reduction reactions, electrochemistry, and nuclear chemistry. Prerequisite: AUCHE 110.
AUCHE 210 Chemistry Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in chemistry. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Chemistry degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Chemistry that requires library research. Notes: The corequisites must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCHE 210, AUBIO 210, AUENV 210, AUGEO 210.
AUCHE 220 Analytical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theoretical and practical aspects of chemical analysis. Topics include gravimetry, titrimetry, separations, acid-base equilibria, chromatography, and spectrophotometry. Examples emphasize the utility and limitations of analytical techniques. Prerequisite: AUCHE 112. Recommended corequisite: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUCHE 222 Instrumental Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Study of the theory and practice of instrumental methods of analysis. Topics include atomic absorption and emission spectroscopy, fluorometry, liquid and gas chromatography, physical separations, and electrochemical methods. Examples include the analysis of chemicals with environmental importance. Prerequisite: AUCHE 220. Recommended corequisite: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUCHE 230 Inorganic Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Electronic structure of atoms, bonding and molecular structure, ionic bonding, symmetry and point groups, introduction to spectroscopy; infrared and Raman spectroscopy, uv-visible spectroscopy; chemistry of hydrogen, boron hydrides, cyclic boron-nitrogen, phosphorus-nitrogen, and sulfur-nitrogen compounds. Prerequisite: AUCHE 112.
AUCHE 232 Inorganic Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Theory and applications of organometallic chemistry, metal carbonyls, metal nitrosyls, dinitrogen complexes, transition metal organometallic compounds, synergic bonding, organometallic catalysts, fluxional molecules; descriptive chemistry of the s- and p-block elements; fullerenes. Prerequisite: AUCHE 230.
AUCHE 250 Organic Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An introduction to bonding and functionality in organic compounds. Mechanistic approach to solving problems will be emphasized, with discussion of the reactions of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and alkyl halides. The three-dimensional structure of molecules and the concept of stereochemistry will be examined. Infrared spectroscopy and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy will be applied in both the lecture and the lab. Prerequisite: AUCHE 110; AUCHE 112 is recommended.
AUCHE 252 Organic Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Continuation of AUCHE 250, again emphasizing a mechanist approach. The chemistry of alcohols, conjugated unsaturated systems, aromatic rings, carbonyl-containing compounds, organic reduction-oxidation reactions, and beta-dicarbonyl compounds will be discussed. Carbohydrate chemistry will be introduced as a way to explore many concepts in a biochemical context. Prerequisite: AUCHE 250.
AUCHE 277 Introduction to Relativity and Quantum Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special relativity; photons and matter waves; Bohr atom model; Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle; Schrödinger equation; one- dimensional systems; hydrogen atom; spin; Pauli Exclusion Principle; many-electron atoms; molecules. Prerequisites: AUCHE 112, AUMAT 112, and AUPHY 120. Corequisite: AUMAT 211 is recommended. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCHE 277, AUPHY 260.
AUCHE 279 Physical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Study of the principles and concepts of physical chemistry. Topics include the laws of thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium, phase, equilibria, surface chemistry, chemical kinetics and catalysis and spectroscopy and photochemistry. Prerequisites: AUCHE 112 and AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUCHE 280 Biochemistry: Proteins, Enzymes and Energy Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The structure and function of proteins and enzymes and the structure, function and metabolism of carbohydrates. The structure and function of lipids, nucleic acids, and amino acids are introduced. The course focuses on how enzymes catalyze the oxidation of carbohydrates and how the cell conserves this energy in a useful chemical form. Prerequisites: AUBIO 230 and AUCHE 250. Notes: Formerly part of AUCHE 380. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 280 and AUCHE 280.
AUCHE 305 Selected Topics in Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of selected topics in Chemistry. Prerequisites: *6 in Chemistry at the 200 level, *3 of which must be in the subject area of the particular selected topics course.
AUCHE 320 Analytical Chemistry III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and application of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. Prerequisite: AUCHE 222.
AUCHE 322 Topics in Analytical Electrochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of electrochemistry and electroanalytical techniques. Prerequisite: AUCHE 222.
AUCHE 324 Research Techniques in Analytical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). An advanced analytical laboratory course utilizing spectroscopic, chromatographic and electroanalytical techniques. The emphasis will be on the application of the instrumental techniques for the analysis and identification of unknown samples. Prerequisites: AUCHE 320.
AUCHE 330 Transition Metal Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Ligand field theory, molecular orbital theory, stereochemistry, magnetochemistry, applications of nuclear magnetic resonance to transition metal complexes, isomerism, reaction mechanisms, electronic spectra and ligand field calculations, descriptive chemistry, transition metals in biological systems, the lanthanides and actinides. Prerequisite: AUCHE 230.
AUCHE 350 Organic Chemistry III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Continuation of the foundation laid in AUCHE 250 and 252, considering in greater depth and breadth various familiar topics (e.g., reactions of carbonyl compounds), and exploring reactions (e.g., free-radical, enantioselective, green chemistry) and techniques (e.g., use of protecting groups) and investigating classes of compounds (e.g., heterocycles) barely touched upon previously. The laboratory work illustrates and expands upon lecture material, and provides practice in spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques. Prerequisite: AUCHE 252.
AUCHE 377 Quantum Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of AUCHE 277. Prerequisites: AUMAT 211; one of AUCHE 277, AUPHY 260. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCHE 377 and AUPHY 360.
AUCHE 381 Biochemistry: Intermediary Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Structure, function, and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleic acids at the level of cells and organs. Prerequisites: AUBIO 280 or 380 or AUCHE 280 or 380, and AUCHE 252. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCHE 381 and AUBIO 381.
AUCHE 390 Senior Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A research project on a specific topic in chemistry to be determined jointly by the student and professor. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 390 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 392 Senior Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A research project on a specific topic in chemistry to be determined jointly by the student and professor. Prerequisite: AUCHE 390. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 392 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 397 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised literature research project. Prerequisite: Third-year standing. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 397 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 399 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised literature research project. Prerequisite: AUCHE 397. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 399 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 405 Selected Topics in Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of selected topics in Chemistry. Prerequisites: *12 of senior Chemistry, at least *3 of which must be in the subject area of the particular selected topics course.
AUCHE 450 Enzymes and Enzyme Mechanisms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the mechanism of different classes of enzymes along with experimental techniques used in enzymology. Note: AUBIO/ AUCHE 280 (Biochemistry Proteins, Enzymes and Energy) is a suggested pre or corequisite.
AUCHE 455 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of selected topics in Organic Chemistry. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing in Chemistry program and *6 of Chemistry at the 300 level, *3 of which must be in Organic Chemistry.
AUCHE 485 Selected Topics in Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of selected topics in Biochemistry. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing in Chemistry program; *3 AUCHE 381 or AUBIO 381; and an additional *3 of AUCHE at the 300-level. Note: Credit may only be obtained for one of AUBIO 485 and AUCHE 485.
AUCHE 490 Advanced Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A research project on a specific topic in chemistry to be determined jointly by the student and professor. Prerequisite: AUCHE 390. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 490 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 492 Advanced Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A research project on a specific topic in chemistry to be determined jointly by the student and professor. Prerequisite: AUCHE 390. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 492 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 497 Directed Reading III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Chemistry as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 497 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An `Application for Individual Study’ must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCHE 499 Directed Reading IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Chemistry as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing and AUCHE 497. Notes: Admission to AUCHE 499 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Chemistry. An ‘Application for Individual Study’ must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Classical Studies
AUCLA
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUCLA 100 Greek Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the major contributions of the Greeks to Western civilization in art, architecture, education, literature, philosophy, and politics.
AUCLA 102 Greek and Roman Mythology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of classical mythology based on readings in translation from ancient literature. Study of the influence of classical mythology on art, film, literature, and music.
AUCLA 193 Selected Topics in Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics in Greek and Roman art and archaeology. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 193, 293 or AUART 260.
AUCLA 194 Selected Topics in Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3 weeks). Three-week study tour of ancient Greek and/or Roman sites. Note: Tour costs are the responsibility of the student. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUCLA 220 Classical Foundations of Western Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of classical Greek and Latin literature in translation from the pre-Homeric period up to late antiquity. This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive overview of major classical texts that shaped European and British literature from the Middle Ages to the present. Close attention will be paid to the evolution of genres, such as the epic, the lyric, satire, and tragedy. Prerequisites: AUCLA 100 or 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 220, 320, AUCLA 220, 320.
AUCLA 221 History of Ancient Greece I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of Greece from the Bronze Age to the Persian Wars. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 221 and AUHIS 203.
AUCLA 222 History of Ancient Greece II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of Greece from the Persian Wars to the end of the Hellenistic Age. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 222 and AUHIS 204.
AUCLA 223 History of the Roman Republic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of the Roman Republic from its beginnings to the Battle of Actium in 31 B.C. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 223 and AUHIS 207.
AUCLA 224 History of the Roman Empire Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of the Roman Empire from the time of Augustus to the fall of the west in the fifth century A.D. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 224 and AUHIS 208.
AUCLA 242 Greek and Roman Epic in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of Greek and Roman epic poetry in English translation, including works of Homer, Hesiod, Apollonius of Rhodes, Vergil, Ovid, and Lucan.
AUCLA 243 Greek and Roman Tragedy in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of Greek and Roman tragedy in English translation, including works of Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and Seneca.
AUCLA 244 Greek and Roman Comedy in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of Greek and Roman comedy in English translation, including works of Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, and Terence.
AUCLA 291 Greek Art and Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Greek art, architecture, and archaeology from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic Age.
AUCLA 292 Classics Tour (Greece) Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3 weeks). Three-week study tour on selected topics in the archaeology, art, and architecture of ancient Greece. Prerequisite: AUCLA 291 or consent of the instructor. Note: Tour costs are the responsibility of the student.
AUCLA 293 Selected Topics in Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics in Greek and Roman art and archaeology. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 193, 293 or AUART 260.
AUCLA 294 Selected Topics in Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (spring/summer, 3 weeks). Three-week study tour of ancient Greek and/or Roman sites. Note: Tour costs are the responsibility of the student. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUCLA 301 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Classics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUCLA 302 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Classics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUCLA 303 Directed Reading III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Classics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUCLA 304 Directed Reading IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Classics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUCLA 305 Directed Reading V Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Classics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUCLA 310 Ancient Greek Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of ancient Greek philosophy from its origins with the Pre-Socratics up to and including Plato and Aristotle. Prerequisites: AUPHI 101 and 102 preferred, but not necessary. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCLA 310 and AUPHI 311.
AUCLA 320 Classical Foundations of Western Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of classical Greek and Latin literature in translation from the pre-Homeric period up to late antiquity. This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive overview of major classical texts that shaped European and British literature from the Middle Ages to the present. Close attention will be paid to the evolution of genres, such as the epic, the lyric, satire, and tragedy. Prerequisites: AUCLA 100 or 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 220, 320, AUCLA 220, 320.
AUCLA 361 Women in Greece and Rome Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the Greek and Roman attitudes toward women as reflected in art, literature, law, and religion.
#
Augustana Faculty - Community Service Learning
AUCSL
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUCSL 100 An Introduction to Community Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary introduction to community and civic engagement for students interested in preparing the groundwork for undertaking further experiential educational opportunities (e.g., Internships, Study Abroad, CSL).
AUCSL 300 Theory and Practice of Community Service-Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth exploration of theories and practices of civic engagement and community change for students who have already completed a course with a CSL component and who wish to extend their volunteer experience. Prerequisite: Completion of a course with a CSL component and consent of instructor. Note: For information about Augustana CSL, consult the Learning and Beyond office. For courses in programs and departments that offer a CSL component, see the link on the Augustana Faculty website www. augustana.ualberta.ca/csl.
AUCSL 350 Selected Topics in Community Service-Learning Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Content varies from year to year. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor. Corequisite: variable. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUCSL 360 Community Service-Learning Practicum Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Content varies from year to year but will include a significant service component. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Pre/corequisite: consent of the instructor. Note: AUCSL 360 is classified as an arts course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUCSL 361 Community Service-Learning Practicum Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Course content varies from year to year but will include a significant service component. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Pre-and/or corequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: AUCSL 361 is classified as a science course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUCSL 480 Directed Study in Community Service-Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual study opportunity on topics for which no specific course is currently offered. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor based on completion of a CSL placement (a record of courses and students can be found in the Learning and Beyond office).
#
Augustana Faculty - Computing Science
AUCSC
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUCSC 110 Introduction to Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Historical overview of the development of modern computers; computer applications and the social implications of information technology; the user interface and system design principles; introduction to programming and the software life cycle; overview of programming languages and introduction to program translation; gates, circuits, and Boolean logic; the architecture of a von Neumann machine; Turing machines and the theory of computation; artificial intelligence; computers and society. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1.
AUCSC 111 Introduction to Computational Thinking and Problem Solving Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to computational thinking, problem solving, and the fundamental ideas of computing science through programming in a scripting language (such as Python or Ruby). Topics include algorithms, abstraction, and modelling; the syntax and semantics of a high-level language; fundamental programming concepts and data structures, including simple containers (arrays, lists, strings, dictionaries); basic software development methods and tools; documentation and style; introduction to object-oriented programming; exceptions and error handling; graphical user interfaces and event-driven programming; recursion; introduction to algorithm analysis and run-time efficiency. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCSC 111 and AUCSC 120.
AUCSC 112 Data Structures and Algorithms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to object-oriented design and programming in Java; algorithm analysis; data structures and container classes (lists, stacks, queues, priority queues, maps, dictionaries), their implementations (arrays, linked lists, heaps, hash tables), and associated algorithms (insertion, removal, iterators, sorting, retrieval); introduction to recursion. Prerequisite: AUCSC 111 or 120. Corequisite: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116 and 120. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCSC 112 and AUCSC 210.
AUCSC 120 Abstraction, Design, and Object-Oriented Programming Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to programming, problem solving, and designing large software systems using an object-oriented programming language (typically Java); objects, classes, methods, messages, parameters, inheritance, encapsulation, binding, polymorphism; algorithmic constructs; basic data structures; overview of software engineering. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 Corequisites: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116, and 120.
AUCSC 210 Algorithm Analysis and Data Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to algorithm analysis and Onotation. Abstract data types (lists, stacks, queues, trees, priority queues, dictionaries, sets), their implementations (linked lists, binary trees, heaps, binary search trees, balanced search trees, hash tables), and associated algorithms (iterators, enumerators, traversal, sorting, searching, retrieval). Prerequisites: AUCSC 120, AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116, and AUMAT 120. Corequisite: AUMAT 250.
AUCSC 220 Software Engineering I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Software engineering paradigms, requirements specification, iterative software development, object-oriented design patterns, visual modelling with UML, software architecture; testing, verification and maintenance; software development environments and software engineering tools; societal implications such as the cost of failure and professional responsibilities. Prerequisite: AUCSC 112 or 210.
AUCSC 250 Computer Organization and Architecture I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to computer systems as multilevel machines. Topics include data representation; the organization and execution cycle of Von Neumann machines; assembly-level programming, addressing modes, control flow, procedure calls, input/output, interrupts, caching; finite state machines, Boolean algebra, logic gates, and digital circuits. Prerequisite: AUCSC 112 or 120.
AUCSC 310 Algorithm Design and Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Trees, binary trees, search trees, their implementation, traversal, and search and update operations. Introduction to graph theory; data structures for the representation of graphs, digraphs, and networks, and their associated algorithms (traversal, connected components, topological sorting, minimum-spanning trees, shortest paths, transitive closure). Dynamic equivalence relations and union-find sets; amortized analysis. String matching. Algorithm design techniques (divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, the greedy method). Merge-sort and the analysis of divide-and-conquer algorithms with recurrence relations; bucket-sort, ratix-sort, and the lower bound on sorting; comparison of sorting algorithms. Prerequisites: AUCSC 112 or 210 and AUMAT 250.
AUCSC 320 Software Engineering II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Detailed study of software development processes, life cycles, and tools, especially object-oriented methods. Team work is emphasized in the completion of a large software project, from problem definition through to maintenance. Prerequisite: AUCSC 220.
AUCSC 330 Database Management Systems I Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to current database management systems in theory and practice. Topics include relational database design (including entity-relationship modelling, relational schema, and normal forms); relational algebra, use of a query language (typically SQL) and other components of a current database management system; overview of database system architecture, file structures (including B-tree indices), query processing, and transaction management; new directions. Prerequisites: AUCSC 112 or 210, and AUMAT 250.
AUCSC 340 Numerical Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Computer arithmetic and errors, solution of systems of linear equations, root finding, interpolation, numerical quadrature, and numerical solutions of ordinary differential equations. Applications from physics are included. Prerequisites: AUCSC 111, AUMAT 120, AUMAT 112; or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCSC 340, AUMAT 340, AUPHY 340.
AUCSC 350 Computer Organization and Architecture II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1.5). Architecture of historical and contemporary computer systems, including CPU chips and buses, memory, secondary memory devices, and I/O interfaces. Performance enhancement techniques, including prefetching, pipelining, caching, branch prediction, out-of-order and speculative execution, explicit parallelism, and predication are discussed. The course also includes the data path and control logic at the microarchitecture level; error detection and correction; floating-point number representation and calculation; fast arithmetic circuits; instruction sets and formats; and an overview of alternative and parallel architectures, including RISC/CISC, SIMD/MIMD, shared memory and message passing architectures. Prerequisite: AUCSC 250.
AUCSC 355 Networks and Security Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to computer communication networks and network security. Physical and architectural elements and information layers of a communication network, including communication protocols, network elements, switching and routing, local area networks, and wireless networks. Authentication, cryptography, firewalls, intrusion detection, and communication security, including wireless security. Prerequisite: AUCSC 250. Corequisite: AUCSC 380
AUCSC 370 Programming Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Principles of language design, abstraction, syntax and parsing, operational semantics (declaration, allocation, evaluation, run-time environment, typing, activation), and programming language paradigms (procedural, object-oriented, functional, logic programming). Prerequisites: AUCSC 112 or 210, and AUMAT 250. Corequisite: AUCSC 250.
AUCSC 380 Operating Systems Concepts Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1.5). Operating system functions, concurrent process coordination, scheduling and deadlocks, memory management and virtual memory, secondary storage management and file systems, protection. Prerequisites: AUCSC 250.
AUCSC 395 Directed Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific area of Computing Science as defined by the student and a supervising instructor, including completion of a software project in the selected area. Prerequisite: *9 of senior-level Computing Science. Notes: Admission to AUCSC 395 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Computing Science. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCSC 398 Selected Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a selected topic in computing science. The focus and content of each course offering are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: At least third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Computing Science as determined by the instructor.
AUCSC 399 Selected Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Advanced study of a selected topic in computing science. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Computing Science as determined by the instructor.
AUCSC 401 Professional Practicum I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). A four-month work experience placement focused on gaining practical experience in software development and/or information systems, and an appreciation of the demands and responsibilities of the computing profession. Upon completion of the work experience term, the student must submit a report to the Department which summarizes, evaluates, and reflects on the work performed and the knowledge and experience gained during the placement. Prerequisites: At least *18 in Computing Science, third-year standing, and consent of the Department. Note: Participation in the practicum is by application only, and is restricted to Computing Science majors.
AUCSC 402 Professional Practicum II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). A four-month work experience placement focused on gaining practical experience in software development and/or information systems, and an appreciation of the demands and responsibilities of the computing profession. Upon completion of the work experience term, the student must submit a report to the Department which summarizes, evaluates, and reflects on the work performed and the knowledge and experience gained during the placement. Prerequisites: AUCSC 401 and consent of the Department. Note: Participation in the practicum is by application only, and is restricted to Computing Science majors.
AUCSC 415 Automata, Algorithms and Complexity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Models of computers, including finite automata and Turing machines, basics of formal languages, compatibility, algorithm optimality, complexity classes (p, NP, NPcomplete, EXP, PSPACE, etc.), probabilistic algorithms, approximation algorithms, number-theoretic and other selected algorithms, including selection and order statistics. Prerequisites: AUCSC 310. Notes: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has previously been received for AUCSC 315, 410, or AUMAT 355.
AUCSC 450 Parallel and Distributed Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Parallel architectures, programming language constructs for parallel computing, parallel algorithms and complexity. Message- passing, remote procedure call, and shared-memory models. Synchronization and data coherence. Load balancing and scheduling. Appropriate applications. Prerequisites: AUCSC 350.
AUCSC 460 Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Survey of concepts and applications of artificial intelligence, including knowledge representation, state-space search, heuristic search, expert systems and shells, natural language processing, propositional logic, learning and cognitive models, vision; implementation using an AI language (LISP or PROLOG). Prerequisites: AUCSC 370 and AUMAT 250.
AUCSC 490 Social and Ethical Issues for Computing Professionals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and social context of computing; the social and ethical responsibilities of the computing professional; the risks and liabilities that can accompany a computing application; intellectual property. The course includes extensive writing assignments and oral presentations. Prerequisite: At least *18 in Computing Science, including AUCSC 220 or 330; at least third- year standing.
AUCSC 495 Directed Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific area of Computing Science as defined by the student and a supervising instructor, including completion of a software project in the selected area. Prerequisite: *9 in Computing Science at the 300 level. Notes: Admission to AUCSC 495 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Computing Science. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUCSC 498 Selected Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a selected topic in computing science. The focus and content of each course offering are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: At least third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Computing Science as determined by the instructor.
AUCSC 499 Selected Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Advanced study of a selected topic in computing science. The focus and content of each course offering are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: At least third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Computing Science as determined by the instructor.
#
Augustana Faculty - Crime and Community
AUCRI
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUCRI 160 Introduction to Crime, Correction, and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to crime and correction in Canada. The theory and practice accompanying law enforcement, trial, correctional intervention, and probation and parole are analyzed by drawing from a range of disciplinary traditions such as ethical reflection, psychological theory, social and political thought, and biological understandings of criminality. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 160 and AUIDS 160.
AUCRI 200 Young Offenders and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integrative examination of theories of delinquency, the relationship of the young offender to Canadian criminal law, family, drug abuse, child abuse, and recent developments in community-based treatment programs. Prerequisites: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, AUIDS 160 or AUCRI 160, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 200 and AUSOC 200.
AUCRI 222 Canadian Social Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to sociological perspectives on social problems. Various theoretical orientations are applied to contemporary Canadian social issues such as poverty, gender issues, aboriginal rights, human sexuality, and regionalism. Prerequisites: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, AUIDS 160 or AUCRI 160, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 222 and AUSOC 222.
AUCRI 224 Studies in Deviant Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interactionist analysis of processes accompanying the definition of deviance, subculture formation, careers of involvement in deviant activities, and the formal and informal regulation of deviance. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, AUIDS 160, AUSOC 101, 103, 105. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 224 and AUSOC 224.
AUCRI 225 Criminology: A Canadian Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of anthropological and sociological explanations of crime and criminality, including a cross-cultural analysis of the social processes accompanying criminal activities. The course focuses on criminality as defined under Canadian criminal law and the traditional legal systems of Canada’s aboriginal peoples. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, AUIDS 160, AUSOC 101, 103, 105. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 225 and AUSOC 225.
AUCRI 260 Crime and Community Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research and skills in the discipline of Crime and Community. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in an IDS-Crime and Community degree program. Corequisite: Second-year standing in Crime and Community. Any senior course in Crime and Community that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 260, AUPOL 201, AUSOC 231.
AUCRI 327 Crimes of the Powerful Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Why is it that so much attention is paid to “street crime” while the crimes of the powerful go virtually unpunished and sometimes unnoticed? A comprehensive examination of the prevalence and impact of crime committed by the powerful, including white collar occupational crime, corporate crimes, and crimes committed by the state. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, 224, 225, 353, AUIDS 160, AUPOL 353, AUSOC 224, 225, and 3rd year standing or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 327, 427, AUSOC 327, 427.
AUCRI 353 Law, Politics, and the Judicial Process Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the Canadian judicial branch of government in comparative perspective. The course probes court structures; judicial independence, appointment, discipline, and removal; judicial decision making processes; and courts and the public policy process. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, 221, AUCRI 160, AUIDS 160. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 353 and AUPOL 353.
AUCRI 427 Crimes of the Powerful Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Why is it that so much attention is paid to “street crime” while the crimes of the powerful go virtually unpunished and sometimes unnoticed? A comprehensive examination of the prevalence and impact of crime committed by the powerful, including white collar occupational crime, corporate crimes, and crimes committed by the state. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, 224, 225, 353, AUIDS 160, AUPOL 353, AUSOC 224, 225, and 3rd year standing or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 327, 427, AUSOC 327, 427.
AUCRI 453 Women and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores historical and contemporary relationships between women and the Canadian legal system. The course uses feminist legal theory to explore the evolution of areas of Canadian law of particular interest to women (for example: reproduction, abortion, family law, rape laws, criminal law) and political activism around the law and women’s issues. Prerequisites: One of AUCRI 353, AUPOL 353, 355 or AUIDS 230. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 453 and AUPOL 453.
AUCRI 488 Law and Forensic Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the psychology of criminal behaviour and the legal system. Topics covered include theories of criminal behaviour, jury selection and decision-making, police interrogations and confessions, eyewitness testimony, and risk assessment and offender intervention programs. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 488 and AUPSY 488.
#
Augustana Faculty - Drama
AUDRA
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUDRA 101 Play Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey and critical analysis of dramatic literature from ancient Greek to contemporary. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 109 Script Analysis and Production Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Script analysis and production preparation for the Drama Department’s major production. Note: Students should take this course at the year level that coincides with the year level at which they are registered in the subsequent production (AUDRA 139).
AUDRA 123 Introduction to Oral Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study in speech and rhetoric for effective oral communication and interpretation. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 138 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition.
AUDRA 139 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Note: Distinct from AUDRA 138 in that it is a separate production with a different director.
AUDRA 144 Improvisation I: Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Speech and movement improvisation with an emphasis on imaginative development; introduction to the process of acting and to dramatic form. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 141 (2013) and AUDRA 144.
AUDRA 148 Community Theatre Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-4L-0). Two-credit course offered over the full year, including participation in all scheduled performances. Participation in the course is determined by audition - being cast in a significant role in the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the Division. Note: An “Application for Community Theatre Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUDRA 201 History and Critical Analysis of Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of crucial works, genres, and styles, within the history of Western theatre along with the critical analysis of contemporary theatrical presentations. Prerequisite: AUDRA 101.
AUDRA 209 Script Analysis and Production Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Script analysis and production preparation for the Drama Department’s major production. Note: Students should take this course at the year level that coincides with the year level at which they are registered in the subsequent production (AUDRA 239).
AUDRA 220 Introduction to Voice and Speech for Actors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the workings of the human voice and its application to spoken texts.
AUDRA 228 Drama Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Drama. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Drama degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Drama that requires library research. Notes: The corequisites must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 228, AUENG 204, AUFRE 210, AUGER 210, AUSCA 210.
AUDRA 230 Acting Techniques I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to scene study with an emphasis on character and text analysis. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 (2013), AUDRA 144 or Drama 30, or consent of the instructor (based on an audition).
AUDRA 233 Clown and Mask Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration and experimentation in impulse inspired performance using mask, improvisation and clowning techniques. Prerequisite: AUDRA 141 (2013), AUDRA 144, or consent of instructor. Note: Formerly AUDRA 433 (2013) with the following prerequisite: AUDRA 230 or 244. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 238 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 (2013) or AUDRA 144, and consent of the instructor based on audition.
AUDRA 239 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 (2013) or AUDRA 144, and consent of the instructor based on audition. Note: Distinct from AUDRA 238 in that it is a separate production with a different director.
AUDRA 244 Improvisation II: Workshop and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Intensive study in the work of Viola Spolin and Paul Sills, with an emphasis on Improvisational Performance and Collective Creation. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 (2013) or 144.
AUDRA 248 Community Theatre Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-4L-0). Two-credit course offered over the full year, including participation in all scheduled performances. Participation in the course is determined by audition - being cast in a significant role in the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the Division. Note: An “Application for Community Theatre Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUDRA 275 Theatre Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Instruction and practical experience in stage management, publicity and promotion, fundraising, front of house and lighting and sound operation in a repertory theatre setting. Prerequisite: Second-year standing.
AUDRA 301 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Drama to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended for a student with a major in Drama.
AUDRA 309 Script Analysis and Production Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Script analysis and production preparation for the Drama Department’s major production. Note: Students should take this course at the year level that coincides with the year level at which they are registered in the subsequent production (AUDRA 339).
AUDRA 310 Modern Canadian Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Canadian Drama designed to familiarize students with the dramatic literature and theatrical practices of a representative group of twentieth century Canadian playwrights. Prerequisite: AUDRA 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 310 and AUENG 385.
AUDRA 312 Shakespeare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2L-0). Selected works of Shakespeare. Prerequisites: AUDRA 201. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 312, AUENG 233, 333.
AUDRA 320 Performer-Created Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration, practice, and experimentation inperformer-created theatre. Prerequisite: AUDRA 230.
AUDRA 338 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 238 or 239, and consent of the instructor based on audition.
AUDRA 339 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 238 or 239, and consent of the instructor based on audition. Note: Distinct from AUDRA 338 in that it is a separate production with a different director.
AUDRA 340 Movement for the Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of movement for the performer; study and development toward an awareness of the physical body in space; and study in expression and personal movement patterns. Prerequisite: AUDRA 141 (2013), 144, or 230 or consent of the instructor.
AUDRA 344 Improvisation III: Applied Improvisation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration into interactive and improvisational drama as applied to education, therapy, business, recreation, community-building, and personal, group and social empowerment. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 (2013) or AUDRA 144 and third year standing, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 344 and either of AUDRA 345 or 346.
AUDRA 348 Community Theatre Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-4L-0). Two-credit course offered over the full year, including participation in all scheduled performances. Participation in the course is determined by audition - being cast in a significant role in the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the Division. Note: An “Application for Community Theatre Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUDRA 350 Introduction to Directing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Fundamentals of directing explored through practical exercises. Prerequisites: AUDRA 141 and consent of the instructor. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 360 Dramaturgy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Role of the dramaturge, in theory and practice, in professional and amateur theatre. Offers a bridge between the academic (theoretical and historical) and the practical (communicating to an audience) aspects of the discipline. Prerequisite: AUDRA 101 or 201 or consent of the instructor.
AUDRA 367 Critical Discourse and the Fine Arts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to Theory and the Fine Arts. A critical study of historical and contemporary issues in the fine arts with an emphasis on themes common to the disciplines of drama, music and the visual arts as cultural processes. Discussions of various theoretical positions including critical and cultural theory, aesthetic theory, disciplinary history and a history of criticism. Prerequisite: Third-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 367, 467, AUART 367, 467, AUMUS 367,467.
AUDRA 384 Playwriting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Study of the theory of, and practice in, writing for the stage. Prerequisites: AUDRA 230, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 384 and AUENG 319.
AUDRA 391 Intermediate Production Lab Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Production experience in stage management and/or technical theatre under the supervision of the production director and contracted experts. Prerequisites: One of AUDRA 138, 139, 238, 239, 338, 339 and consent of the Department.
AUDRA 395 Canadian Theatre Festivals Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Includes 1 week tour. Examination of the significance of two festivals to Canadian theatre history and exploration of the impact of G. B. Shaw and William Shakespeare on Western theatre. This course analyses texts from the current year’s festivals and includes a week-long tour to Canada’s two major theatre festivals The Shaw Festival at Niagara-on-the-Lake and the Stratford Festival at Stratford. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 396 Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to the theory, history, and practice of performance on stage or in secondary visual media. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor.
AUDRA 397 Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to the theory, history, and practice of performance on stage or in secondary visual media. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor.
AUDRA 398 Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to the theory, history, and practice of performance on stage or in secondary visual media. Prerequisite: AUDRA 101.
AUDRA 399 Selected Topics in Drama Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to the practice of performance on stage or in secondary media. Prerequisite: Second year standing.
AUDRA 401 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of concentration for highly advanced students to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: AUDRA 301. Notes: An application for Individual Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course. Must have fourth year standing and receive Department Chair approval.
AUDRA 409 Script Analysis and Production Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Script analysis and production preparation for the Drama Department’s major production. Note: Students should take this course at the year level that coincides with the year level at which they are registered in the subsequent production (AUDRA 439).
AUDRA 430 Movement and Physical Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the use of abstract and improvisational movement with a view to creating physical performance pieces. Prerequisite: AUDRA 320 or 340. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 431 Acting for the Camera Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the basics of acting for both television and film style productions. Emphasis is placed on truthful acting within the medium of the camera. The course will include live tapings of auditions (including selected scenes and monologues), and cold readings for sitcoms and television dramas. Prerequisites: AUDRA 230 and 244.
AUDRA 437 Senior Showcase Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Research, rehearsal, production and performance of a play chosen specifically for a senior level acting ensemble. Priority given to fourth year students. Prerequisites: AUDRA 230 and 238 or 239. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUDRA 438 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 338 or 339, and consent of the instructor based on audition.
AUDRA 439 Theatre Company Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Involves an extensive research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 338 or 339, and consent of the instructor based on audition. Note: Distinct from AUDRA 438 in that it is a separate production with a different director.
AUDRA 444 Improvisation IV: Story Theater Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). The course will focus on creating a spontaneous performance by applying Spolin/Sills based improvisation to a newly scripted play in the Story Theater style. Prerequisite: AUDRA 244.
AUDRA 448 Community Theatre Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-4L-0). Two-credit course offered over the full year, including participation in all scheduled performances. Participation in the course is determined by audition - being cast in a significant role in the chosen production. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: An “Application for Community Theatre Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUDRA 467 Critical Discourse and the Fine Arts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to Theory and the Fine Arts. A critical study of historical and contemporary issues in the fine arts with an emphasis on themes common to the disciplines of drama, music and the visual arts as cultural processes. Introduction to Theory and the Fine Arts. A critical study of historical and contemporary issues in the fine arts with an emphasis on themes common to the disciplines of drama, music and the visual arts as cultural processes. Discussions of various theoretical positions including critical and cultural theory, aesthetic theory, disciplinary history and a history of criticism. Prerequisite: Third- year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUDRA 367, 467, AUART 367, 467, AUMUS 367, 467.
AUDRA 509 Script Analysis and Production Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Script analysis and production preparation for the Drama Department’s major production. Note: Students should take this course at the year level that coincides with the year level at which they are registered in the subsequent production (AUDRA 539).
AUDRA 538 Theatre Production Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Includes a research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 438 and consent of the instructor based on audition.
AUDRA 539 Theatre Production Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Ensemble production of improvisational or scripted plays. Includes a research component appropriate to the chosen production. Prerequisites: AUDRA 439 and consent of the instructor based on audition.
#
Augustana Faculty - Economics
AUECO
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUECO 101 Introduction to Microeconomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic analysis, problems, and policies, with emphasis on the Canadian economy; roles of consumers and firms in competitive and monopolistic markets; foreign ownership in the Canadian economy; distribution of income, inequality, and poverty; use of the environment; government economic policies.
AUECO 102 Introduction to Macroeconomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic analysis, problems, and policies, with emphasis on the Canadian economy; national income and monetary theory; problems of unemployment and inflation; government monetary and fiscal policies; international trade theory, problems, and government policies. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 182 Business Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to business functions, decision-making, and financial reporting. Participants will make decisions in a variety of business areas including product placement, sales forecasting, marketing, and finance using a computer-based simulation.
AUECO 190 Economic Issues (Cornerstone Course) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). AUECO 190 is the cornerstone course in the Bachelor of Arts in Economics program. It prepares the students with skills necessary for the study of economics. It does this through an examination of current economic issues, the pros and cons of economic way of thinking. The course also helps develop information literacy skills. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 or consent of the instructor. Pre/Corequisites: AUECO 102 and AUSTA 153.
AUECO 203 Intermediate Microeconomic Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory of consumer behaviour; theory of production and cost; price and output determination under competition, monopoly, and other market structures. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 204 Intermediate Macroeconomic Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). National income concepts and income determination; theories of aggregate consumption, investment, and employment behaviour; monetary and fiscal policy. Prerequisite: AUECO 102.
AUECO 206 Mathematics in Economics and Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mathematical analysis of problems arising in economics and finance, including an introduction to economic modelling; simple, compound, and continuous rates of interest; static and comparative-static analysis; optimization; annuities, mortgages, bonds, and other securities; dynamics. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 and one of AUMAT 110, 111 or 116. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 206, AUMGT 206, AUMAT 235.
AUECO 212 Economics Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Economics. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in an Economics degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Economics that requires library research. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 212, AUMGT 212. The corequisite must be taken concurrently.
AUECO 215 Economic Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of economic thought, focusing on the major schools of thought from classical political economy to post-war neoclassicism. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 220 Thinking Strategically Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to game theory and strategic thinking in economics, business, and related disciplines. Prerequisites: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 and AUECO 101.
AUECO 251 History of Canadian Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Canada’s economic development from before Confederation until the present. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 251 and AUHIS 262.
AUECO 252 India Tour Orientation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Examination of the intersection between religion and development in India. Students research and present on a particular topic relevant to the intersection of religion and development, as well as participate in team building exercises. Issues such as health and safety, travel preparations, dealing with culture shock, and the regional geography of India will be covered. Prerequisite: One of AUREL 100, 283, AUECO 101, consent of the instructor. Notes: This is a prerequisite course for the India Tour (AUECO 254 or AUREL 266). Costs associated with the India Tour (3-weeks) and applicable tuition are the responsibility of the student. Enrolment is limited to 15 students. This course can only be taken by students who also register in AUECO 254 or AUREL 266. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 252 or AUREL 260.
AUECO 254 India Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). Three-week study tour of India that focuses on a chosen region of India in order to examine the intersection between religious belief and practice and development challenges. Students will be exposed to various development projects as well as an array of religious sites. It is expected that students will gain an in depth understanding of India, its cultural and religious diversity, and the challenges it faces in the 21st century. Students will be exposed to both rural and urban life. Prerequisite: AUECO 252 or AUREL 260. Notes: Costs associated with this India Tour course and applicable tuition are the responsibility of the students. Enrolment is limited to 15 students. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 254 and AUREL 266.
AUECO 257 The International Economy in Historical Perspective I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic analysis of modern economic growth focusing on the Industrial Revolution and its consequences. Critical thinking about why the Industrial Revolution and its related economic growth models can and/ or cannot be generalized worldwide is also encouraged.
AUECO 258 The International Economy in Historical Perspective II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic analysis of the international economy during the past century. Topics examined include the disintegration of national and international economies after World War I, the Great Depression, and the fate of national and international economies after World War II. Critical thinking about whether international economic integration has promoted worldwide economic growth and stability is also encouraged.
AUECO 264 Globalization and Growth Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Study of globalization and its role in economic development from a historical perspective. This course will examine the pros and cons of globalization, reasons countries trade, the distributional consequences of trade, and the role of multinational and international organizations. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 311 Introductory Econometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Introduction to the application of econometric methods in economics and business. The focus is on major topics in econometrics with emphasis on applied regression methods. Prerequisites: AUSTA 153 and AUECO 203.
AUECO 323 Industrial Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of various patterns of internal organization in industries, focusing on the relations among the structure, conduct, and performance of the industries. Prerequisite: AUECO 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 323 and AUMGT 323.
AUECO 333 Money and Banking in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the role of money and of monetary institutions and policy in the framework of Canadian financial institutions. Prerequisite: AUECO 101 and 102.
AUECO 336 Economics of Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of economic approaches to financial market activity: the meaning and measurement of risk, portfolio investment choices and market equilibrium, theory of interest and the term structure of interest rates, inter-temporal and macro-policy issues, and debt management. Prerequisite: AUECO 101 and 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 336 and AUECO 436.
AUECO 341 Environmental Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the relationships between the economy and the environment. Emphasis is placed on the application of economic analysis to various environmental issues. Prerequisite: AUECO 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 341 and AUENV 341.
AUECO 346 Agricultural Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of economic theory and policy relating to the agricultural sector of the economy. Emphasis is placed on the economic aspects of agricultural production, marketing, finance, and resource use with particular reference to agricultural policy in Canada and Alberta. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 354 Economic Development and Institutional Change in China Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A survey of China’s growth and economic development in the pre reform and post reform periods, exploring ideology, institutional structures, and state planning, and analyzing the impact of globalization on China’s business and political practices. Prerequisite: AUECO 101 and one of AUPOL 103 or AUPOL 104; or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 354 and AUPOL 358.
AUECO 356 China Tour: Experiencing Development and Change Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). A three week study trip to China, including travel to educational institutions in Zhuhai, the Zhuhai Special Economic Zone and other locations depending on the year. Through lectures, tours and research taking place in China, this course explores the effects of economic and institutional reforms as well as those of globalization, with links to China’s history and to its culture. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 356 and AUPOL 356.
AUECO 360 International Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the theories of international trade and investment, the international monetary system, and the multinational firm. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 363 International Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the types of international transactions, exchange rate determination, balance of payments adjustments, macroeconomics in an open economy, and other issues in the international monetary system. Prerequisite: AUECO 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 363 and AUECO 463.
AUECO 364 Development Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the major approaches to and problems of economic development in the less-developed nations. Particular emphasis is placed on issues relating to capital accumulation, income distribution, population growth and employment, and international economic relations. Prerequisite: AUECO 101.
AUECO 380 Selected Topics in Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Economics. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 and 102. Notes: Minimum third year standing.
AUECO 381 Selected Topics in Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Economics. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 and 102. Notes: Minimum third year standing.
AUECO 382 Strategic Planning and Decision-making Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a holistic understanding of business strategy and competitive dynamics using a computer-based business simulation. Participants will make decisions in a variety of business areas including product placement, sales forecasting, marketing, finance, and labour relations. Prerequisites: 3rd year standing MGT or ECO major or minor, *3 in a senior level AUMGT or AUECO.
AUECO 384 Intermediate Microeconomic Analysis II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for majors in Economics, dealing with extensions and applications of microeconomic theory: topics include intertemporal choice, risk, uncertainty and expected utility; oligopoly and game theory; externalities, public goods, adverse selection, moral hazard, and asymmetric information; general equilibrium. Prerequisites: AUECO 203 and AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUECO 385 Intermediate Macroeconomic Analysis II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for majors in Economics. Theories of stabilization policy; expectations; the government budget constraint; inflation and unemployment; business cycles and growth; theories of aggregate consumption, investment, money demand and money supply. Prerequisites: AUECO 203, 204 and AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUECO 390 Economics Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Students choose either the winter term (in their 3rd/4th year) or the spring/summer term (at the end of 3rd year) to spend time working full or part time outside the University. This course offers students an opportunity to apply economic analysis in real world setting. Prerequisites: At least *9 at a senior level in economics and consent of the instructor.
AUECO 393 Public Sector Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of the use of resources for public purposes by all levels of government, emphasizing the rationale for public expenditures, taxation structures, and public choice mechanisms. Prerequisite: AUECO 102.
AUECO 397 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of economics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in economics.
AUECO 398 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of economics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUECO 397 or 497, and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in economics.
AUECO 422 Industrial Organization and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of oligopoly theory, the economics of mergers and takeovers, competition policy, and industry regulation. Prerequisites: AUECO 203 and AUECO/AUMGT 323. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 422, AUMGT 422.
AUECO 436 Economics of Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of economic approaches to financial market activity: the meaning and measurement of risk, portfolio investment choices and market equilibrium, theory of interest and the term structure of interest rates, inter-temporal and macro-policy issues, and debt management. Prerequisite: AUECO 101 and 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 336 and AUECO 436.
AUECO 449 Economic Methods of Project Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of investment projects using various economic methods. Topics include the use of cost-benefit analysis, impact analysis, and methods to examine the relations among economic activity, the environment, and development. Prerequisites: AUECO 203 and 204.
AUECO 463 International Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the types of international transactions, exchange rate determination, balance of payments adjustments, macroeconomics in an open economy, and other issues in the international monetary system. Prerequisite: AUECO 102. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 363 and AUECO 463.
AUECO 465 International Trade Policy and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of various trade models. The application of economic tools to international trade policy; tariffs, quotas, export subsidies, and application of game theory to international trade. Prerequisite: AUECO 203. Note: AUECO 360 is highly recommended.
AUECO 480 Ethics in Economics and Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of the relation between ethical reflection and the activities of businesses and economics. Attention is paid to the role of self-interest and rationality in economic and business discourse, the relation between the price system and human values, and the morality of the market as a means of social organization. Several case studies are used. Prerequisite: At least *6 at a senior-level in Economics or Management.
AUECO 490 Senior Seminar in Economics (Capstone Course) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A capstone course for economics majors. Students read and discuss scholarly articles in which economics plays a role in understanding events. Students will use the economic way of thinking to prepare and present a research paper. The goal of the course is to use economic theory and data to analyze important theoretical, empirical and policy questions and also help develop analytical writing, presentation, speaking and listening skills. Prerequisites AUECO 311 and AUECO 384, or consent of the instructor. Pre/Corequisite: AUECO 385. Note: Open only to Economics majors.
AUECO 497 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of economics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in economics.
AUECO 498 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of economics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUECO 397 or 497, and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in economics.
#
Augustana Faculty - Education Field Experience
AUEFX
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUEFX 200 Introduction to the Profession of Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-4). Orientation to teaching. For the laboratory component of the course, a student spends half a day per week assisting in a local elementary or secondary school. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUEFX 200 and 201.
AUEFX 201 Orientation to Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-6). Introductory education course with a field experience component for a student intending to teach at the elementary or secondary level. The field experience component consists of two three-hour or three two- hour blocks of time per week assisting in a local school classroom. Notes: The course is designed for a student intending to apply for admission to the Faculty of Education at the University of Lethbridge, which requires a field experience component of at least 60 hours. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUEFX 201 and 200.
#
Augustana Faculty - Educational Computing
AUEDC
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUEDC 210 Introduction to Educational Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Examination of frameworks, issues and trends regarding the role of technology in education. Students will gain hands-on experience applying learning theory and sound pedagogy to integrating technology into the school curriculum, using tools for internet use, digital media processing, multimedia/hypermedia presentations, and common software. Prerequisites: Basic computer skills, preferably with a MS Windows environment, including word processing, e-mail, and use of a web browser. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUEDC 210, AUEDC 202 (2015), EDU 210 and EDIT 202.
#
Augustana Faculty - Educational Psychology
AUEPS
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUEPS 258 Educational Psychology for Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Introduction to the fundamental concepts and issues in educational psychology. The focus is on the child from preschool to adolescence through examination of learning and instruction, individual differences, motivation, assessment, and classroom management. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or AUPSY 103.
#
Augustana Faculty - English
AUENG
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUENG 101 Critical Reading, Critical Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). English 101 is a writing-intensive course designed to facilitate the transition of L2/ESL students into the regular academic stream at Augustana. Students in this course will develop written and oral communication skills by engaging with literary texts from a variety of genres. Fundamental, universally-applicable writing skills (grammar, diction, rhetorical strategies) will be taught in collaborative workshop settings. Through a series of reflective and interpretive writing assignments, the course will also train students in the practices of analytical reading and critical thinking. The ultimate aim of this course is to provide students with the necessary building blocks for university-level writing. Prerequisite: EAP 145 or equivalent (i.e., other L2/ESL students who were not required to take the Bridging Program).
AUENG 102 Critical Reading, Critical Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). English 102 has two objectives. The first is to train students in the practices of analytical reading and critical thinking. To that end, we will read engaging literary texts in several genres. The second objective is to help students develop effective communication skills, particularly their writing abilities. To develop writing techniques, we will workshop grammatical skills which will provide the necessary building blocks for university-level writing. Prerequisite: ELA 30-1 or AUENG 101.
AUENG 103 English Literature from the Romantic Period to the Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Familiarizes students with works of literature written in English from the Romantic period (c. 1780) to the present. While this survey is chronological, equal attention will be paid to exploring the major genres in which authors wrote. Class time will be spent developing students’ communication and critical thinking skills through a range of assignments and in-class workshops. Prerequisite: ELA 30-1 or AUENG 101.
AUENG 104 English Literature from the Middle Ages to the Romantic Period Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Familiarizes students with works of literature written in English from the Middle Ages to the end of the eighteenth century. While this survey is chronological, equal attention will be paid to exploring the major genres in which authors wrote. Class time will be spent developing students’ communication and critical thinking skills through a range of assignments and in-class workshops. Prerequisite: AUENG 102 or 103.
AUENG 202 Women’s Writing and Feminist Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist theological approaches will be used to analyze religious and devotional writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Texts in the areas of scripture, systematic theology, ethics, and feminist theory and spirituality will be analyzed to understand the importance of feminist theological practice in dialogue with the Judeo-Christian tradition and women’s struggles for justice and well-being. Literary texts will include fiction, poetry, essays and personal narrative by authors such as Toni Morrison, Louise Erdrich, Alice Sebold, Emily Dickinson, Adrienne Rich, and Louise Glück. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 202, 302, AUREL 202, 302.
AUENG 204 English and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of English. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in an English degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in English that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 204, AUFRE 210, AUDRA 228, AUGER 210 and AUSCA 210.
AUENG 205 Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of literature written for or appropriated by children. The course considers the historical development of children’s literature and examines prevailing and changing attitudes toward children. It addresses major themes and issues in children’s literature, and studies significant texts representative of important genres and trends in the field. Critical analysis of the literature will be stressed. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 305.
AUENG 206 Native Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students in this course will study a diverse body of literature for children and young adults written by North American First Nations authors. The work of leading Native theorists will be included so that analysis of these picture books and novels for young people will be informed by and rooted in Indigenous ways of understanding the world. In crafting a method of reading that is grounded in the traditions and concerns of North American First Nations people, students will attend to the ways in which these texts present the oral tradition, locate themselves in specific tribal territories and cultural practices, connect their narratives to the environment, and re-present Indigenous histories. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104.
AUENG 207 Aboriginal/Indigenous Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of literature by First Peoples, including narratives from the oral tradition, fiction, poetry, drama, essays, and personal narratives. Themes will include traditional and contemporary perspectives on gender, cultural and political identity, and spirituality. Multiple critical approaches (aesthetic, linguistic, political, historical, and cultural) will be employed in examining this literature, including selections from Native critical texts. Content, period, and national focus will vary. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, and 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 307.
AUENG 208 African Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of African literature in English from a variety of genres. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 308.
AUENG 211 The History of the English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical development of the English language from its Indo-European roots to its present-day forms, including Canadian English. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Formerly part of AUENG 213. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 213, 311 or 313.
AUENG 212 The English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structures, varieties, and uses of contemporary English. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Formerly part of AUENG 213. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 213, 312 or 313.
AUENG 213 The English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structures, varieties and uses of contemporary English, and a survey of its historical development. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 211, 212, 311, 312 or 313.
AUENG 215 Creative Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the writing of poetry and short fiction. Literary examples are analyzed, and a student is required to write poetry and fiction with attention to specific elements of writing such as imagery, structure, dialogue, and characterization. A central element of the course is peer discussion. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104.
AUENG 220 Classic Foundations of Western Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a survey of Classical Greek and Latin literature in translation from the preHomeric period up to late antiquity. This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive overview of major classical texts that shaped European and British literature from the Middle Ages to the present. Close attention will be paid to the evolution of genres, such as the epic, the lyric, satire, and tragedy. Prerequisites: *6 of AUENG 102, 103 or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 220, 320, AUCLA 220, 320.
AUENG 221 Chaucer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by Chaucer, with emphasis on The Canterbury Tales. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 321.
AUENG 225 Middle Ages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Old and Middle English literature (excluding Chaucer) in its social and cultural contexts. Some works are read in translation and some in the original. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 325.
AUENG 230 The Early English Renaissance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature of sixteenth-century England, including Shakespeare, showing the influence of Renaissance ideas and literary forms. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 330.
AUENG 231 The Later English Renaissance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature of the early seventeenth century (excluding Milton) in relation to the intellectual and historical developments of the period. Representative writers include Donne, Jonson, Herbert, Herrick, Marvell, Bacon, Burton, and Wroth. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 331.
AUENG 233 Shakespeare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2L-0). Selected works of Shakespeare. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 233, 333, AUDRA 312.
AUENG 239 Milton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the development and artistry of Milton’s poetry and selected prose, with emphasis on Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Samson Agonistes. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 339.
AUENG 241 The Augustan Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature - poetry, prose, drama, and fiction - of the period from 1660 to 1745. The majority of the authors of this period, including Dryden, Wycherley, Behn, Astell, Fyge, Swift, Pope, and Defoe, were above all concerned with a person’s relation to other people, the practical questions of ethical behaviour. The predominant mode was satiric. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 341.
AUENG 243 The Age of Sensibility Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature - poetry, prose, and fiction - of the period between 1745 and 1800. This period saw the rise of the novel as an art form with such acknowledged masters as Fielding and Austen. Initially its poets became more introspective, moving away from the predominantly social concerns of the previous age, though by the end of the period writers fired by revolutionary zeal, like Wollstonecraft, Burns, and Blake, attacked the status quo and the power structures it supported. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 343.
AUENG 252 The British Romantic Period Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of the Romantic poets, and related prose materials. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 352.
AUENG 254 The Earlier Victorian Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of three major poets: Tennyson, Browning, and Arnold. As well, one novel by Dickens and one novel by another author are studied. Attention is also given to essays by at least three of the following: T. Carlyle, J. H. Newman, J. S. Mill, J. Ruskin, M. Arnold, and T. H. Huxley. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 354.
AUENG 255 The Later Victorian Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of the later Victorians including Hardy, Wilde, and Gissing. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 355.
AUENG 261 The Modern British Novel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of early twentieth-century British novelists including Joyce, Woolf, and D. H. Lawrence. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 361.
AUENG 265 Modern and Contemporary Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of British, United States, and other English-speaking poets. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 365.
AUENG 266 Women’s Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of writing by women, including poetry, fiction, drama, essays, and personal narrative. The focus of the course may be historical or thematic, and will include writing in English from different nations. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103 and 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 366.
AUENG 267 Contemporary Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative literary works of the latter half of the twentieth century, particularly those written within the last two decades. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 367.
AUENG 268 Women and Environmental Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of women’s writing about nature and environment focusing on various themes relevant to environmental literature, primarily the various ways that the natural world is represented in literature, and the relationship between cultural constructions of nature and cultural constructions of gender, class, race, and sexuality. Works include fiction, poetry, and/or nonfiction. An introduction to several ecofeminist theorists provides a critical framework for exploring images and themes in women’s environmental literature. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 268, 368, AUENV 268, 368.
AUENG 269 The End of the World: Contemporary Apocalyptic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the contemporary speculative creative writers who consider the end of the world as we know it and the relationship of this literature to a growing body of scientific evidence that warns of global collapse if current damaging human practices are not abated. Consideration will be given to these works as cautionary tales, thought experiments, and socio- political satire. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 269, 369, AUENV 269, 369.
AUENG 270 United States Literature to 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of American literature from discovery and the Puritan migration in the 16th and 17th centuries through the American Civil War (1861-1865). Genres will include poetry, personal narrative, speeches and essays, short stories and novels. Authors will include lesser known writers alongside Hawthorne, Melville, Poe, Stowe, Dickinson and Whitman. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 370.
AUENG 271 United States Literature since 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of American literature since the American Civil War (1861-1865). Genres will include poetry, personal narrative, speeches and essays, short stories and novels. Authors will include lesser known writers alongside Howells, Wharton, Faulkner, Plath, Pynchon, Morrison, Pinsky, Erdrich, Chabon and DeLillo. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 371.
AUENG 280 Canadian Literature to 1950 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). As well as giving a broad sweep of the development of Canadian literature from colonial times to the middle of the twentieth century, the course focuses on three movements: the Confederation poets such as Roberts, Carman, Lampman, and D.C. Scott; the emergence of fictional realism in the works of Grove, Callaghan, MacLennan, and Wilson; and the revolt of the poets of the 1920s, F. R. Scott, Smith, Pratt, Klein, and Livesay. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 380.
AUENG 281 Canadian Literature since 1950 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of literature in English in Canada from the middle of the twentieth century to the present, an age that some have termed postmodernist. The course focuses on the rise and fall of realism in fiction and also the emergence of distinctively Canadian voices among our poets. Included are works by Laurence, Atwood, Wiebe, Munro, Davies, Birney, Page, Purdy, and Layton. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 381.
AUENG 290 History of English Literary Criticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of major developments in literary criticism in England from the seventeenth through the twentieth century. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 390.
AUENG 291 Contemporary Criticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of trends in contemporary criticism such as Marxist, feminist, structuralist, and poststructuralist criticism. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Notes: Limited to majors and minors in English.
AUENG 292 Feminist Critical Theory and Women’s Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist critical approaches will be used to analyze writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 392.
AUENG 298 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies of selected authors, works, periods, topics, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and instructor interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104.
AUENG 299 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies of selected authors, works, periods, topics, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and instructor interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 299 and AUENG 399.
AUENG 302 Women’s Writing and Feminist Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist theological approaches will be used to analyze religious and devotional writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Texts in the areas of scripture, systematic theology, ethics, and feminist theory and spirituality will be analyzed to understand the importance of feminist theological practice in dialogue with the Judeo-Christian tradition and women’s struggles for justice and well-being. Literary texts will include fiction, poetry, essays and personal narrative by authors such as Toni Morrison, Louise Erdrich, Alice Sebold, Emily Dickinson, Adrienne Rich, and Louise Glück. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 202, 302, AUREL 202, 302.
AUENG 305 Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of literature written for or appropriated by children. The course considers the historical development of children’s literature and examines prevailing and changing attitudes toward children. It addresses major themes and issues in children’s literature, and studies significant texts representative of important genres and trends in the field. Critical analysis of the literature will be stressed. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 205.
AUENG 306 Native Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students in this course will study a diverse body of literature for children and young adults written by North American First Nations authors. The work of leading Native theorists will be included so that analysis of these picture books and novels for young people will be informed by and rooted in Indigenous ways of understanding the world. In crafting a method of reading that is grounded in the traditions and concerns of North American First Nations people, students will attend to the ways in which these texts present the oral tradition, locate themselves in specific tribal territories and cultural practices, connect their narratives to the environment, and re-present Indigenous histories. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291).
AUENG 307 Aboriginal/Indigenous Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of literature by First Peoples, including narratives from the oral tradition, fiction, poetry, drama, essays, and personal narratives. Themes will include traditional and contemporary perspectives on gender, cultural and political identity, and spirituality. Multiple critical approaches (aesthetic, linguistic, political, historical, and cultural) will be employed in examining this literature, including selections from Native critical texts. Content, period, and national focus will vary. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 207.
AUENG 308 African Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of African literature in English from a variety of genres. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 208.
AUENG 311 The History of the English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical development of the English language from its Indo-European roots to its present-day forms, including Canadian English. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Formerly part of AUENG 213. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 211, 213 or 313.
AUENG 312 The English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structures, varieties, and uses of contemporary English. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Formerly part of AUENG 213. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 212, 213 or 313.
AUENG 313 The English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structures, varieties and uses of contemporary English, and a survey of its historical development. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 211, 212, 213, 311, or 312.
AUENG 314 Advanced Creative Writing: Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of the poetry instruction begun in AUENG 215. The completion of at least a draft of a chapbook-length collection of poems (20 to 48 pages) is required. Prerequisite: AUENG 215 or consent of the instructor.
AUENG 316 Advanced Creative Writing: Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of the fiction instruction begun in AUENG 215. The completion of a chapbook-length collection of fiction (20 to 48 pages) is required. Prerequisite: AUENG 215 or consent of the instructor.
AUENG 317 Expository Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Working from a common mode of inquiry, the analysis and criticism of literary texts, the course explores some of the prevailing theories of expository writing while providing extensive practice. Prerequisite: *6 at a senior level in English (excluding AUENG 204, 205, 206, 211, 212, 215, 311, 312, 314, 316) or consent of the instructor.
AUENG 318 Creative Writing Long Manuscript, Novel Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Advanced study of fiction, toward a publishable end. Students will devise and complete a long manuscript project over the course of the year, and will take part in an intensive workshop process.. Prerequisite: AUENG 215 and one of AUENG 314, AUENG 316 or AUENG 319.
AUENG 319 Playwriting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Study of the theory of, and practice in, writing for the stage. Prerequisites: AUENG 215, or consent of the instructor. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 319 and AUDRA 384
AUENG 320 Classical Foundations of Western Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a survey of Classical Greek and Latin literature in translation from the preHomeric period up to late antiquity. This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive overview of major classical texts that shaped European and British literature from the Middle Ages to the present. Close attention will be paid to the evolution of genres, such as the epic, the lyric, satire, and tragedy. Prerequisites: *6 of AUENG 102, 103 or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 220, 320, AUCLA 220, 320.
AUENG 321 Chaucer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by Chaucer, with emphasis on The Canterbury Tales. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 221.
AUENG 325 Middle Ages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Old and Middle English literature (excluding Chaucer) in its social and cultural contexts. Some works are read in translation and some in the original. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 225.
AUENG 330 The Early English Renaissance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature of sixteenth-century England, including Shakespeare, showing the influence of renaissance ideas and literary forms. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 230.
AUENG 331 The Later English Renaissance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature of the early seventeenth century (excluding Milton) in relation to the intellectual and historical developments of the period. Representative writers include Donne, Jonson, Herbert, Herrick, Marvell, Bacon, Burton, and Wroth. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 231.
AUENG 333 Shakespeare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2L-0). Selected works of Shakespeare. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 333, 233, AUDRA 312.
AUENG 339 Milton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the development and artistry of Milton’s poetry and selected prose, with emphasis on Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Samson Agonistes. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 239.
AUENG 341 The Augustan Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature - poetry, prose, drama, and fiction - of the period from 1660 to 1745. The majority of the authors of this period, including Dryden, Wycherley, Behn, Astell, Fyge, Swift, Pope, and Defoe, were above all concerned with a person’s relation to other people, the practical questions of ethical behaviour. The predominant mode was satiric. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 241.
AUENG 343 The Age of Sensibility Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature - poetry, prose, and fiction - of the period between 1745 and 1800. This period saw the rise of the novel as an art form with such acknowledged masters as Fielding and Austen. Initially its poets became more introspective, moving away from the predominantly social concerns of the previous age, though by the end of the period writers fired by revolutionary zeal, like Wollstonecraft, Burns, and Blake, attacked the status quo and the power structures it supported. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 243.
AUENG 352 The British Romantic Period Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of the Romantic poets, and related prose materials. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 252.
AUENG 354 The Earlier Victorian Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of three major poets: Tennyson, Browning, and Arnold. As well, one novel by Dickens and one novel by another author are studied. Attention is also given to essays by at least three of the following: T. Carlyle, J. H. Newman, J. S. Mill, J. Ruskin, M. Arnold, and T. H. Huxley. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 254.
AUENG 355 The Later Victorian Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of the later Victorians including Hardy, Wilde, and Gissing. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 255.
AUENG 361 The Modern British Novel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of early twentieth-century British novelists including Joyce, Woolf, and D. H. Lawrence. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 261.
AUENG 365 Modern and Contemporary Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of British, United States, and other English-speaking poets. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 265.
AUENG 366 Women’s Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Offers a critical study of writing by women, including poetry, fiction, drama, essays, and personal narrative. The focus of the course may be historical or thematic, and will include writing in English from different nations. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 266.
AUENG 367 Contemporary Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative literary works of the latter half of the twentieth century, particularly those written within the last two decades. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 267.
AUENG 368 Women and Environmental Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of women’s writing about nature and environment focusing on various themes relevant to environmental literature, primarily the various ways that the natural world is represented in literature, and the relationship between cultural constructions of nature and cultural constructions of gender, class, race, and sexuality. Works include fiction, poetry, and/or nonfiction. An introduction to several ecofeminist theorists provides a critical framework for exploring images and themes in women’s environmental literature. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 268, 368, AUENV 268, 368.
AUENG 369 The End of the World: Contemporary Apocalyptic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the contemporary speculative creative writers who consider the end of the world as we know it and the relationship of this literature to a growing body of scientific evidence that warns of global collapse if current damaging human practices are not abated. Consideration will be given to these works as cautionary tales, thought experiments, and socio- political satire. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 269, 369, AUENV 269, 369.
AUENG 370 United States Literature to 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of American literature from discovery and the Puritan migration in the 16th and 17th centuries through the American Civil War (1861-1865). Genres will include poetry, personal narrative, speeches and essays, short stories and novels. Authors will include lesser known writers alongside Hawthorne, Melville, Poe, Stowe, Dickinson and Whitman. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 270.
AUENG 371 United States Literature since 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of American literature since the American Civil War (1861-1865). Genres will include poetry, personal narrative, speeches and essays, short stories and novels. Authors will include lesser known writers alongside Howells, Wharton, Faulkner, Plath, Pynchon, Morrison, Pinsky, Erdrich, Chabon and DeLillo. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level [excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291]. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 271.
AUENG 380 Canadian Literature to 1950 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). As well as giving a broad sweep of the development of Canadian literature from colonial times to the middle of the twentieth century, the course focuses on three movements: the Confederation poets such as Roberts, Carman, Lampman, and D.C. Scott; the emergence of fictional realism in the works of Grove, Callaghan, MacLennan, and Wilson; and the revolt of the poets of the 1920s, F. R. Scott, Smith, Pratt, Klein, and Livesay. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 280.
AUENG 381 Canadian Literature since 1950 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of literature in English in Canada from the middle of the twentieth century to the present, an age that some have termed postmodernist. The course focuses on the rise and fall of realism in fiction and also the emergence of distinctively Canadian voices among our poets. Included are works by Laurence, Atwood, Wiebe, Munro, Davies, Birney, Page, Purdy, and Layton. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 281.
AUENG 385 Modern Canadian Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a survey course in Canadian Drama designed to familiarize students with the dramatic literature and theatrical practices of a representative group of twentieth century Canadian playwrights. Prerequisite: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 385 and AUDRA 310.
AUENG 390 History of English Literary Criticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of major developments in literary criticism in England from the seventeenth through the twentieth century. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 290.
AUENG 392 Feminist Critical Theory and Women’s Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist critical approaches will be used to analyze writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in AUENG 292.
AUENG 398 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies of selected authors, works, periods, topics, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and instructor interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291).
AUENG 399 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies of selected authors, works, periods, topics, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and instructor interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 299 and AUENG 399.
AUENG 401 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of English as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *15 at a senior level in English, including at least *3 at the 300 level, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUENG 402 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of English as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUENG 401 and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUENG 410 Contemporary Issues in Renaissance Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of some of the recent theoretical developments in the field of Renaissance literature. Topics may include cultural poetics, the relationship between “literary” and “nonliterary” texts, canon formation, gender studies, feminist approaches, the presence of ideology within texts, and the political contexts for literary production and circulation. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104; and one of AUENG 230, 231, 233, 239, 291, 330, 331, 333, 339.
AUENG 411 Historiographic Metafiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of several postmodern literary texts that self-consciously question how past reality may be adequately known or represented. Such literature exposes the ideological assumptions underlying traditional portrayals of history, portrayals often accepted as natural, apolitical, and universal. In the process, this literature suggests the ways in which the supposedly separable categories of fiction and nonfiction may be seen to interpenetrate. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104.
AUENG 412 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 420 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 421 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 430 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 431 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 440 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 441 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 450 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 451 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 460 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
AUENG 461 Selected Topics in English Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Fourth- year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in English as determined by the instructor.
#
Augustana Faculty - English for Academic Purposes
AUEAP
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUEAP 140 English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). This course in English for Academic Purposes (EAP) provides advanced English language students with the opportunities to improve their academic listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Upon completion of AUEAP 140, students are able to engage in short academic activities, including essay writing, reading short texts, and listening to and participating in short lectures and discussions. Delivered in Camrose, AUEAP 140 integrates this skills development focus with experiential and community-engaged learning pedagogies. Prerequisites: TOEFL: iBT: 70-85 (with a minimum score of 17 in each band), or IELTS: 5.5-6.0 (with a minimum score of 5.0 in each band), or successful completion of EAP 135 or ESL 130.
AUEAP 145 English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). This course in English for Academic Purposes (EAP) builds on skills developed in AUEAP 140. Students learn to synthesize information from a variety of academic sources, think critically about materials, and present their ideas in accordance with academic standards found at the first year university-level. Delivered in Camrose, AUEAP 145 integrates this skills development focus with experiential and community-engaged learning pedagogies. Corequisite: AUEAP 140.
#
Augustana Faculty - Environmental Studies
AUENV
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUENV 120 Human Activities and the Natural Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory analysis of the interrelationships between society and the natural world, environmental consequences, and human perceptions. The characteristics and interactions of physical environmental systems and various facets of resource management (including forestry, agriculture, fisheries, protected areas, endangered species, and pollution) are described and analyzed. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 120 and AUGEO 120.
AUENV 201 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of environmental studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Note: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies/ Science. An application for Individual Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 201 is classified as a science course.
AUENV 202 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of environmental studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Note: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies/ Science. An application for Individual Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 202 is classified as an arts course.
AUENV 210 Environmental Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Environmental Studies. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in an Environmental degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Environmental Studies that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 210, AUBIO 210, AUCHE 210, AUGEO 210.
AUENV 233 Soil Science and Soil Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Soil characteristics, formation, processes, occurrence, classification, and management in the natural and modified environment. Prerequisites: *3 course in AUBIO, AUCHE, AUENV, or AUPHY. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 233 and AUGEO 233.
AUENV 252 Wildlife Diversity of Alberta Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Ecology, conservation, and identification of Alberta’s common wildlife species, with a focus on mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, fish, and invertebrates. A mandatory field trip will be included. Prerequisites: AUENV 120, AUGEO 120, AUBIO 110 (2014) or AUBIO 112.
AUENV 260 Environmental Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-3s-0). Practicum placement in a government, industry, or non-governmental organization to gain awareness and experience in an environmental field. Prerequisite: AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120. Notes: Open only to a student with a major in Environmental Studies/Science. AUENV 260 is classified as an arts course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 260, 261, and AUIDS 260.
AUENV 261 Environmental Science Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-3s-0). Practicum placement in a government, industry, or non-governmental organization to gain awareness and experience in an environmental field. Prerequisites: AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120. Notes: Open only to a student with a major in Environmental Science/Studies. AUENV 261 is classified as a science course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 260, 261 and AUIDS 260.
AUENV 268 Women and Environmental Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of women’s writing about nature and environment focusing on various themes relevant to environmental literature, primarily the various ways that the natural world is represented in literature, and the relationship between cultural constructions of nature and cultural constructions of gender, class, race, and sexuality. Works include fiction, poetry, and/or nonfiction. An introduction to several ecofeminist theorists provides a critical framework for exploring images and themes in women’s environmental literature. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103 or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 268, 368, AUENG 268, 368.
AUENV 269 The End of the World: Contemporary Apocalyptic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the contemporary speculative creative writers who consider the end of the world as we know it and the relationship of this literature to a growing body of scientific evidence that warns of global collapse if current damaging human practices are not abated. Consideration will be given to these works as cautionary tales, thought experiments, and socio- political satire. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103 or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 269, 369, AUENG 269, 369.
AUENV 301 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area in environmental science as defined by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies/Science. An application for Individual Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 301 is classified as a science course.
AUENV 302 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area in environmental studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 302 is classified as an arts course.
AUENV 320 Parks and Wilderness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of scientific principles and concepts underlying parks, wilderness and other protected area systems with emphasis on Canada. Topics include history, philosophy, conceptual frameworks, roles in sustainability, and types of biological and geographic designations. Prerequisite: One of AUBIO 253, AUENV 120, AUGEO 120, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 320, 420, AUGEO 320, 420.
AUENV 322 Economic Botany Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biological properties, geographical distribution, application/utilization, and history of vascular and nonvascular plants that are economically important in agriculture industry and medicine. Prerequisites: AUBIO 110 or 111, and *6 of 200-level AUBIO. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 322 and AUBIO 322.
AUENV 324 Resource and Environmental Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integration of both physical and human phenomena in understanding natural resources, their dimensions and boundaries. Basic concepts in resource analysis and management: the decision-making process, management frameworks and strategies, legislation and regulation, impact assessment, the role of perceptions, attitudes and behaviour, and the impact of public participation/interest groups in the development of natural resources. Prerequisite: One of AUBIO 253, AUENV 120, AUGEO 120, 230, 231, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 324 and AUGEO 324. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUENV 327 Environmental Education and Heritage Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and methods of communicating environmental and heritage subject matter to a broad audience. Includes discussion of the history, theory, planning, management, implementation, and evaluation of environmental programs. The course will address a variety of personal and non-personal techniques. Prerequisites: AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120.
AUENV 328 Environmental Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of contemporary debates in, and the evolution of, environmental policy and politics. This course will focus on Canadian issues in a comparative perspective, exploring topics such as environmental political theory, the policy cycle, social movements, international issues, and related case studies. Prerequisite: *3 in either Environmental Studies/Science or Political Studies. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 328 and AUPOL 328.
AUENV 334 Field Studies in Environmental Science and Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). A 3-week field course that provides students an opportunity to develop skills in research and study design in the field of Environmental Science and Ecology. Students will live in a field camp to allow them to fully immerse themselves in their research projects, which could cover the range of ecology, botany, geography, environmental science and/or environmental studies. Course content also includes instruction in key aspects of conservation biology and resource management. Prerequisites: AUSTA 215 and AUENV 120 or AUGEO 120 and one of AUGEO 218, AUGEO 230, AUENV 252, AUBIO 253. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 334, AUENV 334 and AUGEO 334.
AUENV 335 Wildlife Ecology and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practices in the study and management of wildlife populations and communities. Population dynamics, habitat assessment and management, conservation challenges, and emerging trends. Computational models and assignments aid theoretical understanding of material. Prerequisites: AUENV 252; AUBIO 253.
AUENV 341 Environmental Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the relationships between the economy and the environment. Emphasis is placed on the application of economic analysis to various environmental issues. Prerequisite: AUECO 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 341 and AUECO 341.
AUENV 344 Environmental Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Systematic study of the dynamic interchange between people and their social and physical environmental contexts. Topics include theories of environmental perception, the effects of crowding, the impact of natural/urban settings, the effects of building design and colours, and managing limited resources. Prerequisites: AUPSY 102 (2016) or AUPSY 103; third-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 344 and AUPSY 344.
AUENV 345 Religion and Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the complexities and tensions in formulating religious responses to environmental problems. It looks at how eco justice, stewardship, ecological spirituality, and ecofeminism integrate Christian traditions with environmental responsibility. It also devotes substantial time to outlining the ways place-based identities address issues related to colonialism, environmental racism, technology and community. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 345 and AUREL 345.
AUENV 350 Conservation Theory and Biodiversity in Tropical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Introduction to the basic concepts of conservation biology. The scope of conservation biology and levels of biodiversity are explored, as are aspects of tropical ecology related to conservation. Prerequisite: One of AUBIO 253, 294, or 295, and consent of the instructor(s) based on successful completion of the selection process. Note: This course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUBIO 459 or AUENV 459. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 350, 450, AUBIO 350, 450.
AUENV 354 Freshwater Ecology and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the biological, chemical and physical features of freshwater ecosystems, and how they relate to ecological processes in and adjacent to aquatic systems. The course will examine the role of ecological patterns in lakes, ponds, rivers and streams, with an emphasis on freshwater systems and their management in western Canada. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 354, AUBIO 354, and AUGEO 354. The course requires participation in a field trip. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUENV 355 Philosophy, Technology, and the Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of the philosophical and social issues related to technology and the environment. The natural/artificial distinction, different senses of “environment” and the ways we understand, package, and manage nature form the foundation of the course. Issues in environmental ethics are also addressed. Thinkers may include Marx, Heidegger, Marcel, Borgmann, Winner, Singer, Regan, and others. Prerequisite: None, but AUPHI 350 would be useful. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 355 and AUPHI 355.
AUENV 358 Environmental Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and empirical examination of the connection between the natural environment and the social world. This involves inquiry into the sociological dimensions of some major contemporary environmental problems, including air, water and soil pollution, decreased biodiversity, deforestation, climate change, and ozone depletion. Particular attention is paid to the social and political connections among issues of industrialization, development, globalization, inequality, gender, social change and environmental destruction. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and AUENV 120 (or its cross-listed equivalent). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 358, 458 and AUSOC 358, 458.
AUENV 368 Women and Environmental Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of women’s writing about nature and environment focusing on various themes relevant to environmental literature, primarily the various ways that the natural world is represented in literature, and the relationship between cultural constructions of nature and cultural constructions of gender, class, race, and sexuality. Works include fiction, poetry, and/or nonfiction. An introduction to several ecofeminist theorists provides a critical framework for exploring images and themes in women’s environmental literature. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103 or 104, and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 268, 368, AUENG 268, 368.
AUENV 369 The End of the World: Contemporary Apocalyptic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the contemporary speculative creative writers who consider the end of the world as we know it and the relationship of this literature to a growing body of scientific evidence that warns of global collapse if current damaging human practices are not abated. Consideration will be given to these works as cautionary tales, thought experiments, and socio- political satire. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103 or 104 and *6 in English at the 200 level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 269, 369, AUENG 269, 369.
AUENV 375 Canadian Environmental History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical examination of the dynamic interrelationships between the natural world and humans, with a focus on Canadian issues within a North American context. Topics and perspectives will include: Aboriginal peoples, colonization, fur trade, exploration, settlement, western agriculture, science, and the conservation movement. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 375, 475, AUHIS 375, 475.
AUENV 401 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area in environmental science as defined by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies/Science. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 401 is classified as a science courses.
AUENV 402 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area in environmental studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *6 in Environmental Studies. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Environmental Studies. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUENV 402 is classified as an arts course.
AUENV 410 Selected Topics in Environmental Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a selected topic in environmental studies. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Environmental Studies and other disciplines as determined by the instructor.
AUENV 420 Parks and Wilderness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of scientific principles and concepts underlying parks, wilderness, and other protected area systems with emphasis on Canada. Topics include history, philosophy, conceptual frameworks, roles in sustainability, and types of biological and geographical designations. Prerequisite: One of AUBIO 253, AUENV 120, AUGEO 120; and one of AUBIO 350, 351, 353, 359, 450, 459, AUENV 324, 350, 353, 359, 450, 459, AUGEO 324, 351. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 320, 420, AUGEO 320, 420.
AUENV 421 Environmental Science: History and Impacts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the historical developments, past and current impacts, and changing roles of the field of environmental science. Prerequisites: One of AUBIO 350, 353, 450; AUENV 320, 324, 350, 353, 420, 450; AUGEO 320, 324, 420 and at least fourth-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 421 and AUGEO 421.
AUENV 425 Environmental Impact Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History and theory of environmental impact assessment; legislative and policy frameworks; role in resource planning; methods and techniques for the assessment of impacts; future directions. Prerequisites: One of AUENV 324, AUGEO 324, and AUBIO 253. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 425, AUGEO 425. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUENV 459 Field Studies in Tropical Ecology and Conservation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0 2 weeks field work). Field course that addresses problems of biodiversity and conservation in tropical environments. The student participates in field workshops, and designs and conducts their own field project to answer questions related to ecological and biological conservation. Prerequisite: AUBIO 350 or AUENV 350, and consent of the instructors based on successful completion of the selection process. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUBIO 459 and AUENV 459. Students who have received credit for AUBIO 359 or AUENV 359 may enrol in AUBIO 459 or AUENV 459 in a subsequent year based on successful completion of the selection process. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUENV 475 Canadian Environmental History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical examination of the dynamic interrelationships between the natural world and humans, with a focus on Canadian issues within a North American context. Topics and perspectives will include: Aboriginal peoples, colonization, fur trade, exploration, settlement, western agriculture, science, and the conservation movement. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 375, 475, AUHIS 375, 475.
#
Augustana Faculty - French
AUFRE
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUFRE 101 Beginners’ French I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). AUFRE 101 and 102 are designed to develop ability in reading and writing French, with a strong emphasis on the development of comprehension and oral communication skills. During this process the student participates in a wide variety of interactive activities and is also exposed to contemporary francophone culture. These two courses not only encourage the student to think critically about the principles of grammar as they relate to the French language, but also stimulate an in-depth understanding of the principles by which language functions in general. These two courses also lead the student through the steps of reflective learning as they consider and discuss language learning strategies. Notes: The course is not open to a student with credit in French 20, or to a student with French 30 or equivalent. AUFRE 101 does not count toward the major in Modern Languages or the minor in French.
AUFRE 102 Beginners’ French II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUFRE 101. Prerequisite: French 20 or AUFRE 101 or consent of the instructor. Notes: The course is not open to a student with French 30 or equivalent. AUFRE 102 does not count toward the major in Modern Languages or the minor in French.
AUFRE 201 Intermediate French I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Intensive training in spoken and written French. The major focus is on communication. Prerequisite: French 30 or AUFRE 102. Notes: A student wishing to register in AUFRE 201 must first take an on-line placement test. The purpose of the test is to advise the student of the appropriate level at which to begin university French.
AUFRE 202 Intermediate French II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Further development of the speaking, reading, and writing skills acquired in AUFRE 201. The major focus is on formal grammar. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 201; French 31a or 31b or 31c, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French Language Arts 20 or 30 (equal to French immersion), with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 210 French Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of French. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Modern Languages degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in French that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 210, AUENG 204, AUDRA 228, AUGER 210, AUSCA 210.
AUFRE 222 French Pronunciation and Phonetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the French Phonetic System to improve French pronunciation. Prerequisite: AUFRE 201. Corequisite: AUFRE 202.
AUFRE 234 Selected Topics in French Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 235 Selected Topics in French Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 237 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 239 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 301 Advanced French I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). As a normal sequel to AUFRE 202, the course develops further the speaking, reading, and writing skills acquired at the Intermediate level. The major focus is on formal grammar. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 202; French 31a or 31b or 31c, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French Language Arts 20 or 30 (equal to French immersion), with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 305 Aspects of Civilization and Culture of France I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). French civilization and culture up to the French Revolution as seen from historical, geographical, social, and cultural points of view. The course aims at improving the student’s command of oral and written French. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 202; Français 20 or 30, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French 31a or 31b or 31c, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French Language Arts 20 or 30 (equal to French immersion), with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 306 Aspects of Civilization and Culture of France II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). French civilization and culture of modern France as seen from historical, geographical, social, and cultural points of view. The course aims at improving the student’s command of oral and written French. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 202; Français 20 or 30 or French 31a or 31b or 31c, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French Language Arts 20 or 30 (equal to French immersion) with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 307 Topics in the History and Culture of Southern France Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Aspects of the social, political and religious history, as well as the arts, architecture and literature of Southern France. All lectures and readings are in English. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 307 and AUHIS 329.
AUFRE 308 Tour of Southern France Œ2 (fi 4) (Spring/Summer, 2 weeks). Tour of Southern France: History and culture. To complement the topics covered in AUFRE 307. Prerequisite: AUFRE 305 or 307. Notes: Enrolment limited to a maximum of 10 students. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 308 and AUHIS 333. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUFRE 310 Advanced Translation: French into English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). For students having a fair knowledge of French and the total fluency in English. The aim of the course is to improve the student’s ability to understand and render into idiomatic English complex constructions, nuances of meaning, and stylistic devices. The translation of texts by Francophone authors forms the basis of class activity. Prerequisite: AUFRE 202.
AUFRE 311 Advanced Translation: English into French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive training in translation into French of contemporary texts written in English. Prerequisite: AUFRE 301.
AUFRE 317 Business French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Study of the French language (oral and written) as used in the francophone business milieu and in the administrative sector. A student is introduced to the technical vocabulary required to function competently in situations revolving around business life. Prerequisite: AUFRE 301 or consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 331 French-Canadian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the literature of French Canada through a study of representative texts. Included are works by Louis Hémon, Gabrielle Roy, Anne Hébert, Gérard Bessette, Marie-Claire Blais, Emile Nelligan, and Michel Tremblay or Marcel Dubé. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393.
AUFRE 332 Introduction to French-Canadian Short Stories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to short stories of twentieth-century French Canada. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 202; Français 20 or 30, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French 31a or 31b or 31c, with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; French Language Arts 20 or 30 (equal to French immersion), with a sufficient score on the on-line placement test; consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 333 Aspects of French-Canadian Civilization and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Evolution of political, economic, and social patterns in Québec. Documentary sources from the mass media and artistic productions are studied as expressions of lifestyles, ideas, and values. Prerequisite: One of AUFRE 202, Français 20, 30, French 31a or 31b or 31c, consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 334 Selected Topics in French Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 335 Selected Topics in French Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 337 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 339 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in French literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUFRE 341 Children’s Literature in French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The critical analysis of selected children’s literature written in French. These works will be examined in their historical perspective. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393 or consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 342 Francophone Women’s Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of selected works by Francophone women writers. Feminist literary theory is employed to analyze the texts. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393.
AUFRE 355 French Literature of the Seventeenth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the literature and society of the century of Louis XIV through a study of representative texts including works from what is generally regarded as the golden age of French drama. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393.
AUFRE 370 French Literature of the Nineteenth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to French literature of the nineteenth century through a study of representative texts which are analyzed in depth. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393.
AUFRE 380 French Literature of the Twentieth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to French literature of the twentieth century through a study of representative texts which are analyzed in depth. Prerequisite: AUFRE 392 or 393.
AUFRE 390 Introduction to French Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of French literature as a discipline. Texts chosen from different periods and genres of French literature are situated in their socio-historical context and studied not only for their own intrinsic value, but also for their specific value in assisting a student to master techniques of textual analysis. The course focuses on the postrevolutionary era and is taught in French. Assignments are submitted in English. Prerequisite: AUFRE 202 or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 390 and 392.
AUFRE 391 Introduction to French Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of French literature as a discipline. Texts chosen from different periods and genres of French literature are situated in their socio-historical context and studied not only for their own intrinsic value, but also for their specific value in assisting a student to master techniques of textual analysis. The course focuses on the prerevolutionary era and is taught in French. Assignments are submitted in English. Prerequisite: AUFRE 202 or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 391 and 393.
AUFRE 392 Introduction to French Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of French literature as a discipline. Texts chosen from different periods and genres of French literature are located in their socio-historical context and studied not only for their own intrinsic value, but also for their specific value in assisting a student to master techniques of textual analysis. The course focuses on the postrevolutionary period. Prerequisite: AUFRE 202 or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 390 and 392.
AUFRE 393 Introduction to French Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of French literature as a discipline. Texts chosen from different periods and genres of French literature are located in their socio-historical context and studied not only for their own intrinsic value, but also for their specific value in assisting a student to master techniques of textual analysis. The course focuses on the prerevolutionary era. Prerequisite: AUFRE 202 or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUFRE 391 and 393.
AUFRE 402 Directed Study: Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of the French language. Prerequisite: AUFRE 301 or consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUFRE 403 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of French literature and/or civilization as defined by the student and the instructor. Prerequisite: AUFRE 301. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUFRE 496 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, etc. Focus and content of each course are determined by the individual instructor in the light of student needs, and vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing or consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 497 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, etc. Focus and content of each course are determined by the individual instructor in the light of student needs, and vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing or consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 498 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, etc. Focus and content of each course are determined by the individual instructor in the light of student needs, and vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing or consent of the instructor.
AUFRE 499 Selected Topics in French Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, etc. Focus and content of each course are determined by the individual instructor in the light of student needs, and vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing or consent of the instructor.
#
Augustana Faculty - Geography
AUGEO
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUGEO 210 Geography and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Geography. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Geography minor. Corequisite: Any senior course in Geography that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 210, AUBIO 210, AUCHE 210, AUENV 210.
AUGEO 218 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to fundamentals and applications of Geographic Information Systems. Topics include the nature of geographic data, geo-referencing systems, geographic modelling, data collection and management, and spatial analysis. Practical applications of GIS will be emphasized with the use of appropriate computer software. Prerequisite: Any 100-level science course.
AUGEO 230 Geomorphology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Analysis of (1) geomorphological processes and agents (such as movement of the earth’s crust, volcanism, water, glaciers, waves, currents, wind, and gravity) that create and modify the earth’s surface and (2) landforms. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGEO 231 Climatology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Study of (1) elements and processes of climate and weather; (2) distributions and regional patterns of climates; and (3) interrelationships among climates, plants, animals, and people. Note: AUGEO 230 need not precede AUGEO 231. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGEO 242 Cultural Geography of Scandinavia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Scandinavian life and achievement, past and present, with emphasis on social and cultural conditions against a geographical and historical background. All lectures and readings are in English. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 242 and AUSCA 231.
AUGEO 301 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of geography as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *6 in Geography. Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Geography. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUGEO 301 is classified as a science course.
AUGEO 302 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of geography as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *6 in Geography. Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Geography. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUGEO 302 is classified as an arts course.
AUGEO 341 Geography of the Canadian North Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the biophysical environments, resources, economics, and settlements of northern regions of Canada. Prerequisites: One of AUPED 184, 283, 284, 286; *3 in Geography and consent of the instructor. Notes: This course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUGEO 343 or AUPED 388. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 341, 342, and AUPED 387. AUGEO 341 is classified as an arts course.
AUGEO 342 Geography of the Canadian North Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the biophysical environments, resources, economics, and settlements of northern regions of Canada. Prerequisites: One of AUPED 184, 283, 284, 286; *3 in Geography and consent of the instructor. Notes: This course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUGEO 343 or AUPED 388. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 341, 342, and AUPED 387. AUGEO 342 is classified as a science course.
AUGEO 343 Expedition in the Canadian North Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). Examination, involving a three- to four-week expedition in the summer, of the biophysical environments, resources, economics, and settlements of northern regions of Canada. Prerequisites: AUGEO 341, 342 or AUPED 387, and consent of the instructor(s). Notes: Expedition costs, as well as course tuition, are the student’s responsibility. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 343 and AUPED 388. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGEO 351 Biogeography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Analysis of the spatial patterns of biotic systems and species. The course examines their past and present distribution patterns in the context of biological and ecological processes and human impacts. The course employs several methods of analysis, including geographic information systems. Prerequisite: AUBIO 253. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 351 and AUBIO 351. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGEO 401 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of geography as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *6 in science Geography. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Geography. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUGEO 401 is classified as a science course.
AUGEO 402 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Supervised research project and intensive study of a specific area of geography as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *6 in Geography. Notes: Admission to the course normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 in Geography. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUGEO 402 is classified as an arts course.
AUGEO 410 Selected Topics in Geography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a selected topic in geography. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Prerequisites: Third-year standing or consent of the instructor; previous course(s) in Geography and other disciplines as determined by the instructor.
#
Augustana Faculty - German
AUGER
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUGER 101 Beginners’ German I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). German 101 and 102 are designed to develop ability in reading and writing German, with a strong emphasis on the development of comprehension and oral communication skills. During this process, the student participates in a wide variety of interactive activities and is also exposed to contemporary culture of German-speaking countries. These two courses not only encourage the student to think critically about the principles of grammar as they relate to the German language, but also stimulate an in-depth understanding of the principles by which language functions in general. These two courses also lead the student through the steps of reflective learning as they consider and discuss language learning strategies. Notes: The course is not open to a student with credit in German 30. AUGER 101 does not count toward the major in Modern Languages or the minor in German.
AUGER 102 Beginners’ German II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUGER 101. Prerequisite: AUGER 101. Notes: The course is not open to a student with credit in German 30. AUGER 102 does not count toward the major in Modern Languages or the minor in German.
AUGER 200 Intermediate German I and II Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, variable). Intensive course designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing, reading skills acquired in Beginners’ German through classroom instruction, excursions, and immersion experience, including living in a German home. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of the culture of the German-speaking countries and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: One of AUGER 102, demonstration of AUGER 102 equivalency by means of a placement exam administered by the instructor, one year Beginners’ German at a Canadian university. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 200, 201, 202. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGER 201 Intermediate German I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Designed to develop fluency in speaking, with emphasis on comprehension and writing skills. The essential rules of grammar are studied. Prerequisite: One of AUGER 102, demonstration of AUGER 102 equivalency by means of a placement examination administered by the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 200, 201.
AUGER 202 Intermediate German II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUGER 201. Prerequisite: AUGER 201. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 202, 200.
AUGER 210 German Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of German. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Modern Languages degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in German that requires library research. Notes: The corequisites must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 210, AUENG 204, AUDRA 228, AUFRE 210, AUSCA 210.
AUGER 214 German Media Language: Comprehension and Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Intensive course in German media language acquisition through aural, visual, and written comprehension and translation exercises. Translation includes lyrics and radio plays (on cassettes) and videos on German/European history, geography, political science, economics, and philosophy. Prerequisite: AUGER 202.
AUGER 230 Selected Topics in German Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 231 German Culture and Civilization I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German culture and civilization, taught in English. Major cultural trends and movements from early times to 1800 are studied. Notes: The course does not count toward the minor in German or the major in Modern Languages. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 231 and 233.
AUGER 233 German Culture and Civilization I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German culture and civilization, taught in English. Major cultural trends and movements from early times to 1800 are studied. All assignments for the course are submitted in German. Prerequisite: AUGER 302. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 233 and 231.
AUGER 235 Selected Topics in German Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 236 German Culture and Civilization II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German culture and civilization, taught in English. Major cultural trends and movements from 1800 to the present time are studied. Notes: The course does not count toward the minor in German or the major in Modern Languages. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 236 and 238.
AUGER 237 Selected Topics in German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 238 German Culture and Civilization II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German culture and civilization, taught in English. Major cultural trends and movements from 1800 to the present time are studied. All assignments for the course are submitted in German. Prerequisite: AUGER 200 or 202. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 238 and 236.
AUGER 239 Selected Topics in German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 291 German Drama in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of German drama in English translation from the eighteenth century to the present.
AUGER 292 German Fiction in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of German prose fiction in English translation from the eighteenth century to the present.
AUGER 293 Women and German Literature in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of German literature in English translation written by women, and the role of women in German literature in general. Feminist literary theory is employed to analyze the texts.
AUGER 300 Advanced German I and II Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, variable). Intensive course designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing, reading skills acquired in Intermediate German through classroom instruction, excursions, and immersion experience, including living in a German home. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of the culture of the German-speaking countries and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUGER 200 or 202; or two years of German study at a Canadian university, including one year Beginners’ level and one year Intermediate level. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 300, 301 and 302. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGER 301 Advanced German I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Thorough review of German grammar and study of refined stylistics and idioms as represented in selections of twentieth-century short stories. Colloquial expressions presently in use are studied through discussion and audiovisual presentation. Prerequisite: AUGER 200 or 202. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 301, 300.
AUGER 302 Advanced German II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUGER 301. Prerequisite: AUGER 301. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGER 302, 300.
AUGER 313 Advanced German Grammar and Stylistics: Journalistic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Theoretical and practical study of the more complex areas of grammar, style, and idiomatic usage in journalistic writings. Emphasis is on contemporary media language. Prerequisite: AUGER 301 or consent of the instructor.
AUGER 314 Advanced Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice of translation of texts in contemporary German writing. Prerequisite: AUGER 302.
AUGER 317 Business German Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the German language (oral and written) as used in the German business milieu and in the administrative sector. The student is introduced to the technical vocabulary required to function competently in situations revolving around business life. Prerequisite: AUGER 302 or consent of the instructor.
AUGER 321 Survey of Literary Periods I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German literary periods from the beginning of recorded German literature to the Romantic period (ca. 1800). Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 301. Corequisite: AUGER 302.
AUGER 322 Survey of Literary Periods II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to German literary periods from “Biedermeier” (ca. 1830) to the present. Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 301. Corequisite: AUGER 302.
AUGER 334 Selected Topics in German Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 335 Selected Topics in German Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German language studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 337 Selected Topics in German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 339 Selected Topics in German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in German literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUGER 351 Eighteenth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of selected representative works by poets of the following literary periods: Enlightenment, “Empfindsamkeit”, “Sturm und Drang”, classicism, and romanticism. Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 301. Corequisite: AUGER 302.
AUGER 361 Nineteenth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of selected representative works of Biedermeier, realism, and naturalism. Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 301. Corequisite: AUGER 302.
AUGER 371 Twentieth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of selected representative works by writers of the following periods: expressionism, post-World War I, World War II, up to the end of the century. Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 301. Corequisite: AUGER 302
AUGER 400 Advanced German III and IV Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, variable). Intensive course designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing, reading skills acquired in Advanced German through classroom instruction, excursions, and immersion experience, including living in a German home. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of the culture of the German-speaking countries and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUGER 300 or 302; or three years of German study at a Canadian university, including one year Beginners’ level, one year Intermediate level and one year Advanced level. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGER 401 Selected Topics in German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Content varies from year to year, but in general it introduces a specific literary period, or the selected works of some prominent authors who are significant because of their role in the emergence of a new literary genre or a new philosophy. Prerequisite: One of AUGER 300, 302, or 313, consent of the instructor.
AUGER 402 Directed Study: Translation Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Intensive study in translation techniques (German- English, English-German). Specific literature (e.g., reports, sermons, essays, philosophical or business writings) is chosen by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGER 302 and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUGER 403 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of German as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGER 322 and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUGER 415 German Immersion Community Service-Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). Students provide 50 hours of community service to participants in the Canadian Summer School in Germany program in the form of supervised classroom support and peer consultation. They also critically reflect on curriculum as planned, taught, and interpreted and language teacher- student professional interpersonal relations. Prerequisite: Having participated in the Canadian Summer School in Germany and having completed AUGER 200, 300, or 400 and consent of the instructor. Note: Students enrolling in this course must be able to demonstrate a high level of German language proficiency.
AUGER 425 German Language Teaching and Learning Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, variable). Intensive blended course designed to improve students’ understanding and application of second language acquisition theories and pedagogical content knowledge through online and classroom instruction as well as an immersion experience. This course will examine approaches such as content and language integrated learning, drama pedagogy, intercultural ethnography, and task-based language teaching in an immersion setting. Students will also enhance their own German language skills, specifically as relating to everyday interaction, classroom language, and language awareness. Further development of knowledge about German culture, society, and/or history for the purpose of instruction in Canada is also integral to this course. The course materials, instruction and assignments will be in English and German; the immersion component will be entirely in German. Prerequisite: a working knowledge of German and consent of Department. Note: Students enrolling in this course must be able to demonstrate a high level of German language proficiency. This course is intended for pre- service teachers. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUGER 525 German Language Teaching and Learning Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, variable). Intensive blended course designed to improve students’ understanding and application of second language acquisition theories and pedagogical content knowledge through online and classroom instruction as well as an immersion experience. This course will examine approaches such as content and language integrated learning, drama pedagogy, intercultural ethnography, and task-based language teaching in an immersion setting. Students will also enhance their own German language skills, specifically as relating to everyday interaction, classroom language, and language awareness. Further development of knowledge about German culture, society, and/or history for the purpose of instruction in Canada is also integral to this course. The course materials, instruction and assignments will be in English and German; the immersion component will be entirely in German. Prerequisite: a working knowledge of German and consent of Department. Note: Students enrolling in this course must be able to demonstrate a high level of German language proficiency. This course is intended primarily for in-service teachers. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
Augustana Faculty - Global and Development Studies
AUGDS
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUGDS 103 Introduction to Global and Political Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the ideas and key concepts that comprise the vocabulary of global and political studies. The course considers such ideas as democracy, order, power, authority, justice, freedom, development, globalization and equality. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 103 and AUPOL 103.
AUGDS 122 Development Studies Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in an African, Asian, or Latin American country. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 122, 222, 322, AUSPA 240, 340.
AUGDS 123 Development Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). By working in an African, Asian, or Latin American country in projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing co-operatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 123, 223, 323, AUSPA 241, 341.
AUGDS 124 Development Studies Seminar (Canada) Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in Canada. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 124, 224, 324.
AUGDS 125 Development Studies Practicum (Canada) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-6). By working in Canada in development projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing cooperatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee.
AUGDS 222 Development Studies Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in an African, Asian, or Latin American country. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 122, 222, 322, AUSPA 240, 340.
AUGDS 223 Development Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). By working in an African, Asian, or Latin American country in projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid,sustainable farming, developing co-operatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 123, 223, 323, AUSPA 241, 341.
AUGDS 224 Development Studies Seminar (Canada) Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in Canada. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 124, 224, 324.
AUGDS 225 Development Studies Practicum (Canada) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-6). By working in Canada in development projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing cooperatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee.
AUGDS 322 Development Studies Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in an African, Asian, or Latin American country. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 122, 222, 322, AUSPA 240, 340.
AUGDS 323 Development Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). By working in an African, Asian, or Latin American country in projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing co-operatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 123, 223, 323, AUSPA 241, 341.
AUGDS 324 Development Studies Seminar (Canada) Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in Canada. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 124, 224, 324.
AUGDS 325 Development Studies Practicum (Canada) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-6). By working in Canada in development projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing cooperatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of an integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee.
AUGDS 400 Capstone Research Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). Preparation of a literature review, and research proposal, and presentation. Research may be participatory, qualitative, archival, community based, and may include a practical component. Classes will provide supportive and critical analysis throughout students research process and examine issues, theories, and practices central to global and development studies and social change. This course integrates the varied disciplinary approaches and practices experienced throughout the program. Prerequisites: Third or fourth year standing. Only open to majors in IDS-Global and Development Studies. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 400 and AUPOL 400.
#
Augustana Faculty - Greek
AUGRE
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUGRE 101 Beginners’ Hellenistic Greek I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Introduction to the basic grammar and vocabulary of Hellenistic Greek.
AUGRE 102 Beginners’ Hellenistic Greek II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUGRE 101. Prerequisite: AUGRE 101.
AUGRE 203 Intermediate Greek I (Hellenistic) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings in the Hellenistic Greek of the New Testament, Septuagint, Apostolic Fathers, and other Hellenistic works. Review of Greek grammar. Prerequisite: AUGRE 102.
AUGRE 204 Intermediate Greek II (Classical) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected readings in classical Greek literature. Classical Greek is introduced through prose composition. Prerequisite: AUGRE 203.
AUGRE 298 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 203 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 204 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 299 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 203 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 204 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 303 Directed Reading III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 304 Directed Reading IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 305 Directed Reading V Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 306 Directed Reading VI Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 307 Directed Reading VII Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 308 Directed Reading VIII Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 309 Directed Reading IX Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUGRE 310 Directed Reading X Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-0). Readings from a specific area of Hellenistic or classical Greek as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUGRE 298 for Hellenistic Greek texts, AUGRE 299 for classical Greek texts, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
#
Augustana Faculty - History
AUHIS
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUHIS 104 World History: The West Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to understanding our world: aspects of European, North American, and Islamic history.
AUHIS 105 World History: The East and the South Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to understanding our world: aspects of Asian, African, and Latin American history.
AUHIS 121 Topics in Global History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topic in global history. Topics vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest.
AUHIS 190 The Historian’s Craft: Research Skills and Tools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the skills and methods needed for the study of history. The course familiarizes students with the specialized vocabulary of the discipline. It guides students through all the steps necessary to write a research paper: the choice and delineation of a research topic, the elaboration of the thesis, the collection of data and the treatment of the information, the outline and the writing of the paper. Note: This course is only open to students with a major or a minor in History.
AUHIS 201 European History I: Fall of the Roman Empire to the French Revolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major themes in the development of European society from the fall of the Roman Empire in the West to the eve of the French Revolution.
AUHIS 202 European History II: French Revolution to the Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the social, political, and military history of Europe from the French Revolution to the present. Topics include the causes and results of revolutions, strategy and diplomacy of the two World Wars, and the emergence of a new postwar Europe.
AUHIS 203 History of Ancient Greece I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of Greece from the Bronze Age to the Persian Wars. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 203 and AUCLA 221.
AUHIS 204 History of Ancient Greece II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of Greece from the Persian Wars to the end of the Hellenistic Age. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 204 and AUCLA 222.
AUHIS 207 History of the Roman Republic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of the Roman Republic from its beginnings to the Battle of Actium in 31 B.C. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 207 and AUCLA 223.
AUHIS 208 History of the Roman Empire Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of the Roman Empire from the time of Augustus to the fall of the West in the fifth century A.D. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 208 and AUCLA 224.
AUHIS 212 Sport, Physical Activity, and the Body: Historical Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of major themes in the history of sport, physical activity, and the body. Beginning with the ancient civilizations of Greece and Rome, the course explores the social, cultural, political, philosophical, religious, and economic factors that have influenced sport, physical education, and attitudes toward the body in various time periods. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 212 and AUPED 262.
AUHIS 242 British History to 1688 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the salient features of British history from the Roman conquest to 1688.
AUHIS 243 British History since 1688 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the salient features of British history from 1688 to the present.
AUHIS 250 United States History to 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the social, political, and military history of the United States from Colonial times to the Civil War. Topics include European settlement, the War of Independence, making a new country, westward expansion, slavery, and the disruption of the Union.
AUHIS 251 United States History since 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the social, political, and military history of the United States from the Civil War to the present. Topics include Reconstruction, industrial and economic development, Indian wars, the Great Depression, World Wars and the Cold War, and early twenty-first century American exceptionalism.
AUHIS 260 An Introduction to the Study of Canadian History to 1867 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Canada’s political, social and economic development from life before European Contact to Confederation. Lectures, assigned readings, films and discussions will provide factual background on Canadian history and stimulate critical thinking.
AUHIS 261 An Introduction to the Study of Canadian History, 1867 to the Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Political, social, economic and cultural questions of Canada since 1867. Taking a thematic approach, lectures, assigned readings, films and discussions will provide factual background on Canadian history and stimulate critical thinking.
AUHIS 262 History of Canadian Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Canada’s economic development from before Confederation until the present. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 262 and AUECO 251.
AUHIS 271 The History of Women in Canadian Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of Canadian women from the seventeenth century to the present, looking at how Canadian women were affected by, and how they contributed to, changes in Canadian society.
AUHIS 285 Historical Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of History. Prerequisite: Second year standing in a History degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in History that requires library research. Notes: The corequisites must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 285, AUART 228, AUPHI 228, AUREL 228.
AUHIS 291 Cuban History Since 1895 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Study of Cuban history from the War of Independence (1895-1898) to the present. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 251 and AUHIS 291. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program.
AUHIS 300 Topics in European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected periods and themes in European history. Focus and content of each course vary from year to year. Topics are announced before registration.
AUHIS 312 The Modern Olympic Games Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the historical development of the modern Olympic Games. Topics include politics, nationalism, culture, commercialism, media, gender, race and identity. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 312 and AUPED 369.
AUHIS 316 Europe in the Eighteenth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Royal absolutism from Russia to France, the Enlightenment, and the French Revolution. Prerequisite: None, but AUHIS 201 and 202 would be useful.
AUHIS 322 Nineteenth-Century Europe to 1849 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Restoration, liberalism, nationalism, and revolution. Prerequisite: None, but AUHIS 202 would be useful.
AUHIS 323 Nineteenth-Century Europe since 1849 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Industrialization and modernization of continental Europe; origins of World War I. Prerequisite: None, but AUHIS 202 would be useful.
AUHIS 325 Twentieth-Century Europe Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Social, economic, national, intellectual, and military development of Europe from World War I to the end of the twentieth century. Prerequisite : None, but AUHIS 202 would be useful. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 325 and 425.
AUHIS 328 Germany since Frederick the Great Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of modern German history from Frederick the Great (1740) to the defeat of Hitler in 1945.
AUHIS 329 Topics in the History and Culture of Southern France Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Aspects of the social, political and religious history, as well as the arts, architecture and literature of Southern France. All lectures and readings are in English. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 329 and AUFRE 307.
AUHIS 332 Eastern Europe since World War I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Independent East European states, Nazi domination, Soviet conquest, “real-socialism.” Prospects for the future are considered.
AUHIS 333 Tour of Southern France Œ2 (fi 4) (Spring/Summer, variable). Tour of Southern France: History and culture. To complement the topics covered in AUHIS 329. Prerequisite: AUHIS 329. Notes: Enrolment limited to a maximum of 10 students. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 333 and AUFRE 308. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUHIS 337 History of the Soviet Union, 1917 to 1941 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical survey of Soviet domestic and foreign policy from 1917 to 1941.
AUHIS 338 History of the Soviet Union, 1941 to 1991 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical survey of Soviet domestic and foreign policy from 1941 to 1991.
AUHIS 347 The Industrial Revolution in Britain Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intellectual, social, and economic history of Britain, ca. 1750 to 1850. Prerequisite: AUHIS 243 or consent of the instructor.
AUHIS 356 History of the United States West Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the western United States from the late eighteenth through the twentieth century. Special emphasis is given to the west’s integration into the industrial and urban life of the nation. Prerequisite: AUHIS 251 or consent of the instructor.
AUHIS 358 History of United States Foreign Relations to 1914 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of United States foreign relations from 1774 to 1914, the problems of winning and maintaining independence, a century of expansion at home and overseas, Civil War diplomacy, the emergence of the United States as a world power. Prerequisite: AUHIS 250 or consent of the instructor.
AUHIS 359 History of United States Foreign Relations since 1914 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis upon United States leadership in world affairs in the twentieth century, United States relations with the Far East and Latin America, the breakdown of neutrality in the two World Wars, the search for collective security. Prerequisite: AUHIS 251 or consent of the instructor.
AUHIS 360 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 361 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 362 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 363 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 366 History of The Canadian West Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic, political and social development of western Canada. The course will compare and contrast the Canadian West with the American West, discussing the two distinct western myths. The seminar starts with the First Peoples and concludes with an assessment of western Canadian regionalism and “alienation” in present day.
AUHIS 368 History of Sport in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the history of sport in Canadian society, from colonial times to the present. The course links developments in sport to wider changes in Canadian society and social relations. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 368 and AUPED 368.
AUHIS 369 History of Canada’s Aboriginal Peoples Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the history of Aboriginal Canada from the beginning of human occupation of what is now Canada to the present. Special attention is paid to the period after European contact, and to the relationship between Native peoples and the French, British, and Canadian governments.
AUHIS 372 History of Quebec Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A general history of Quebec from the French Regime to the present-day. Lectures and tutorials will place particular emphasis on the development of French Canadian nationalism, and the relationship between Quebec and Canada.
AUHIS 375 Canadian Environmental History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical examination of the dynamic interrelationships between the natural world and humans, with a focus on Canadian issues within a North American context. Topics and perspectives will include: Aboriginal peoples, colonization, fur trade, exploration, settlement, western agriculture, science, and the conservation movement. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 375, 475, AUENV 375, 475.
AUHIS 378 Twentieth-Century Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Social, political, economic, and intellectual developments in twentieth-century Canada.
AUHIS 400 Topics in European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected periods and themes in European history. Focus and content of each course vary from year to year. Topics are announced before registration.
AUHIS 401 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of history as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUHIS 402 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of history as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUHIS 401 and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUHIS 416 Europe in the Sixteenth Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intellectual and social history of the Renaissance and Reformation. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in European history.
AUHIS 425 Twentieth-Century Europe Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Social, economic, national, intellectual, and military development of Europe from World War I to the end of the twentieth century. Prerequisite: *9 in European history. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 425 and 325.
AUHIS 454 The United States Civil War Era, 1846 to 1877 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Political, military, and socio-economic history of the United States Civil War: its causes, prosecution, and aftermath. Prerequisite: AUHIS 250.
AUHIS 460 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 461 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 462 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 463 Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar course which deals with selected topics in Canadian history. Topics vary from year to year. They are announced before registration. Subjects are selected from, but not limited to, politics, labour, education, ideas, family, the legal system, regional issues, ethnicity.
AUHIS 467 The Collaborative Research Seminar: Selected Topics in Canadian History Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). This research seminar explores a field of Canadian history (to be determined by the professor). The course has three main components: critical reading and discussion of a specialized field of Canadian history writing, an historiographical research paper, as well as a collaborative research paper done from archival material and written jointly by members of the seminar.
AUHIS 470 Selected Topics in Canadian Social History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Senior-level seminar for those already possessing a general knowledge of Canadian social history.
AUHIS 475 Canadian Environmental History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical examination of the dynamic interrelationships between the natural world and humans, with a focus on Canadian issues within a North American context. Topics and perspectives will include: Aboriginal peoples, colonization, fur trade, exploration, settlement, western agriculture, science, and the conservation movement. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUHIS 375, 475, AUENV 375, 475.
AUHIS 480 The Historian’s Craft: Historiography Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). How do historians do history? Problems of evidence, interpretation, methodologies, and various paradigms are investigated in the course as the student explores how historians research and write about the past.
#
Augustana Faculty - Indigenous Studies
AUIND
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUIND 101 Introduction to Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the discipline of Indigenous Studies covering indigenous methodologies and theory through the lens of contemporary issues affecting Aboriginal peoples in Canada and attempts to rectify these issues. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 101 and AUIND 201.
AUIND 200 Selected Topics in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics in Indigenous Studies. Topics will vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: Varies according to topic.
AUIND 201 Introduction to Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the discipline of Indigenous Studies covering indigenous methodologies and theory through the lens of contemporary issues affecting Aboriginal peoples in Canada and attempts to rectify these issues. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 101 and AUIND 201.
AUIND 300 Selected Topics in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics in Indigenous Studies. Topics will vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: Varies according to topic.
AUIND 367 The Fur Trade Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar examining the history of the fur trade with a particular focus on Canada. Far from being a political history course, this seminar examines the social and cultural aspects of the fur trade from the pre- contact period to the present in its attempt to answer questions such as the role of the environment, how perceptions of the environment and ecological relations changed and more recently the relationship between the fur trade, environmental/ conservation movements and neocolonialism. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 367 and 467.
AUIND 370 Oral History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar examining the oral history and tradition as systems of knowledge that preserve and pass on knowledge about people, cultures and history. It focuses on historic and contemporary approaches to oral history and traditions, including its use as traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). Students will be taught best practices for conducting research in oral history and tradition, including how to conduct community based research. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 370 and 470.
AUIND 390 Directed Studies in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Directed studies in Indigenous Studies. Topics will vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: Varies according to topic.
AUIND 399 Theories in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A senior level course dealing with the theoretical basis of indigenous studies with a focus on major theories and theoreticians found and/or used in indigenous studies, postcolonial studies and subaltern studies. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 399 and 499. Prerequisites: One of AUIND 101, 201.
AUIND 400 Selected Topics in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics in Indigenous Studies. Topics will vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: Varies according to topic.
AUIND 467 The Fur Trade Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar examining the history of the fur trade with a particular focus on Canada. Far from being a political history course, this seminar examines the social and cultural aspects of the fur trade from the pre- contact period to the present in its attempt to answer questions such as the role of the environment, how perceptions of the environment and ecological relations changed and more recently the relationship between the fur trade, environmental/ conservation movements and neocolonialism. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 367 and 467.
AUIND 470 Oral History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar examining the oral history and tradition as systems of knowledge that preserve and pass on knowledge about people, cultures and history. It focuses on historic and contemporary approaches to oral history and traditions, including its use as traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). Students will be taught best practices for conducting research in oral history and tradition, including how to conduct community based research. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 370 and 470.
AUIND 490 Directed Studies in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Directed studies in Indigenous Studies. Topics will vary from year to year depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: Varies according to topic.
AUIND 499 Theories in Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A senior level course dealing with the theoretical basis of indigenous studies with a focus on major theories and theoreticians found and/or used in indigenous studies, postcolonial studies and subaltern studies. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIND 399 and 499. Prerequisites: One of AUIND 101, 201.
#
Augustana Faculty - Interdisciplinary Studies
AUIDS
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUIDS 100 The World in Progress: Inquiry in the Social Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to inquiry in the social sciences, while enabling them to develop their core academic skills. This course is not an in-depth introduction to the various disciplinary fields within the social sciences, but rather a transdisciplinary introduction to the social sciences as a whole within the context of the liberal arts.
AUIDS 101 Topics in Liberal Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics that highlight the interdisciplinary nature of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. This seminar-style class is a key aspect of the Augustana First Year Experience. The focus and content of each course are determined by faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUIDS 110 Interdisciplinary Science Projects I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3/2). A project-based course that meets for three hours every two weeks in which students will work in teams on projects involving mathematics and at least one other science or social science discipline, including physics, chemistry, biology, environmental science, computing science, economics, sociology, psychology, kinesiology, and political studies. Corequisites: AUMAT 112.
AUIDS 121 Introduction to Development Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the political, economic, literary, cultural, gender, and spiritual aspects of development work and to various development paradigms. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIDS 121, 221 and AUSOC 218.
AUIDS 137 Science Laboratory Experiences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Introduction to experimental work in Biology, chemistry, environmental science and physics. This course emphasizes numeracy, scientific communication and experimental techniques but does not presuppose any specific knowledge of disciplinary content. Note: Closed to students with *6 or more in AUBIO, AUCHE, AUENV and AUPHY.
AUIDS 160 Introduction to Crime, Correction, and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to crime and correction in Canada. The theory and practice accompanying law enforcement, trial, correctional intervention, and probation and parole are analyzed by drawing from a range of disciplinary traditions such as ethical reflection, psychological theory, social and political thought, and biological understandings of criminality. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIDS 160 and AUCRI 160.
AUIDS 201 Foundations in Liberal Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics that highlight the interdisciplinary nature of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. This seminar-style class is a key aspect of the Augustana undergraduate experience. The focus and content of each course are determined by faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIDS 101 and 201.
AUIDS 210 Interdisciplinary Science Projects II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3/2). A second project-based course that meets for three hours every two weeks in which students will work in teams on projects involving mathematics and at least one other science or social science discipline, including physics, chemistry, biology, environmental science, computing science, economics, sociology, psychology, kinesiology, and political studies. Prerequisite: AUIDS 110.
AUIDS 221 Introduction to Development Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the political, economic, literary, cultural, gender, and spiritual aspects of development work and to various development paradigms. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIDS 121, 221 and AUSOC 218.
AUIDS 230 Introduction to Women’s Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey and analysis of issues concerning women’s lives, both historically and in the present; an account of the development of feminist theories and critiques, and an assessment of the contribution this new scholarship has made in transforming perceived knowledge in a variety of disciplines.
AUIDS 242 Introduction to Writing Centre Practices Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). This course introduces students to the theories and practices of tutoring in a writing centre and helps them develop the practical skills required to become effective peer tutors at Augustana’s Writing Centre. These skills will be taught incrementally in a workshop setting that will reflect the working conditions of peer tutoring at a writing centre. In supervised mock- tutoring sessions, students will help each other hone their writing and tutoring skills in preparation for their first peer-tutoring session. Eventually, students will begin undertaking actual tutoring sessions in the Writing Centre, under the supervision of the course instructor. An important component of this class involves several writing assignments that encourage students to reflect on the experience of applying the theories of writing centre pedagogy during tutoring sessions with fellow students from across academic disciplines and from diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. These reflective writing assignments are intended to help crystallize in the minds of students the experience of applying general academic theories to real-world situations. Prerequisites: Consent of the selection committee, based on a portfolio of graded academic writing.
AUIDS 244 Introduction to Peer Tutoring and Second-Language Learning Practices in the Writing Centre Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). This course introduces students to the theoretical underpinnings of writing-centre practices, with a special focus on the area of tutoring ESL or Second Language (L2) learners. Students in this course will develop the practical skills required to become effective tutors for L2 learners in Augustana’s Writing Centre. These skills will be taught incrementally in a workshop setting that will reflect the working conditions of peer tutoring at a writing centre. In supervised mock-tutoring sessions during the fall term, students will help each other hone their writing and tutoring skills in preparation for their first peer-tutoring session. Eventually, students will undertake actual tutoring sessions in the Writing Centre, under the supervision of the course instructor. An important component of this class involves several writing assignments that encourage students to reflect on the experience of applying the theories of writing centre pedagogy during tutoring sessions with fellow students from across academic disciplines and from diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. These reflective writing assignments are intended to help crystallize in the minds of students the experience of applying general academic theories to real-world situations. Prerequisites: Consent of the selection committee, based on a portfolio of graded academic writing.
AUIDS 270 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUIDS 276 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses.
AUIDS 278 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses.
AUIDS 286 Selected Topics in Place-Based Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in place-based learning in specific off-campus locations. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and may vary from year to year. The course will take a specific place as the location and subject of study. The locations of study can be international or closer to home, but in all instances will encourage a significant engagement with the place. Note: AUIDS 286 is classified as an arts course.
AUIDS 287 Topics in Place-Based Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in place-based learning in specific off-campus locations. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. The course will take a specific place as the location and subject of study. The locations of study can be international or closer to home, but in all instances will encourage a significant engagement with the place. Note: AUIDS 287 is classified as a science course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUIDS 290 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in one of these courses.
AUIDS 291 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in one of these courses.
AUIDS 292 Integrative Studies (Cuba) Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This is a mandatory course for all students attending the Augustana in Cuba program. The course will integrate various disciplinary considerations with the student’s experiences while living and studying for a semester in Cuba. Themes will include: Cuban society and culture, Cuba in a Latin American context, Cuba and the world. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUIDS 292 and AUSPA 250. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUIDS 370 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses.
AUIDS 374 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses.
AUIDS 378 Topics in Integrative Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Selected topics on the integration of knowledge between different disciplinary perspectives. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. Each course is team-taught by faculty from at least two distinct disciplines. Note: Even- numbered courses in this series are classified as arts courses; odd-numbered courses are classified as science courses.
AUIDS 386 Selected Topics in Place-Based Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in place-based learning in specific off-campus locations. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and may vary from year to year. The course will take a specific place as the location and subject of study. The locations of study can be international or closer to home, but in all instances will encourage a significant engagement with the place. Note: AUIDS 386 is classified as an arts course.
AUIDS 387 Topics in Place-Based Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in place-based learning in specific off-campus locations. The focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year. The course will take a specific place as the location and subject of study. The locations of study can be international or closer to home, but in all instances will encourage a significant engagement with the place. Note: AUIDS 387 is classified as a science course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUIDS 390 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor; at least third-year standing or *3 at a senior level in Interdisciplinary Studies. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in one of these courses.
AUIDS 391 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area to be defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor; at least third-year standing or *3 at a senior level in Interdisciplinary Studies. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in one of these courses.
#
Augustana Faculty - Language Studies
AULAN
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AULAN 101 Introduction to Linguistic Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Central concepts of linguistics: linguistic categories and structure (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics).
#
Augustana Faculty - Latin
AULAT
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AULAT 101 Beginners’ Latin I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Introduction to the basic grammar and vocabulary of Latin.
AULAT 102 Beginners’ Latin II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AULAT 101. Prerequisite: AULAT 101.
AULAT 203 Intermediate Latin I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected readings in Latin literature. A review of Latin grammar. Prerequisite: AULAT 102.
AULAT 204 Intermediate Latin II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected readings in Latin literature. Prose composition. Prerequisite: AULAT 203.
#
Augustana Faculty - Management
AUMGT
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUMGT 100 Introduction to Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the competitive landscape of Canadian and Global businesses to provide students with the basic information about the different facets of business organizations.
AUMGT 200 Introduction to Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the basic concepts of management. Topics include the origins of management, functional areas of management, levels of management structure, relationship between structure and function of the organization. Prerequisite: AUMGT 100.
AUMGT 206 Mathematics in Economics and Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mathematical analysis of problems arising in economics and finance, including an introduction to economic modelling, simple, compound, and continuous rates of interest; statics and comparative-static analysis; optimization; annuities, mortgages, bonds, and other securities; dynamics. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 and one of AUMAT 110, 111, 116. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 206, AUECO 206, AUMAT 235.
AUMGT 212 Business Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to Library research skills in the discipline of Business Studies. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in the Management Program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Management that requires library research. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 212 and AUECO 212. The corequisite must be taken concurrently.
AUMGT 310 Corporate Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the institutional environment of corporate finance. Topics include corporate financial analysis, planning and control, management of assets, time value of money, capital budgeting; short, medium, and long term financing; mergers, and reorganization/acquisitions. Prerequisites: AUSTA 153, AUACC 311 and AUMGT 200.
AUMGT 320 Business Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines aspects of business/commercial law as it relates to business. Principles of law and its application to typical business situations are discussed. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200.
AUMGT 323 Industrial Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of various patterns of internal organization in industries, focusing on the relations among the structure, conduct, and performance of the industries. Prerequisite: AUECO 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 323 and AUECO 323.
AUMGT 330 Introduction to Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the theory of marketing and its practice. The role of marketing within the business environment is discussed. Topics include the product design and management, national and international marketing strategies, consumer behaviour, product distribution and pricing, and market research. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200.
AUMGT 340 Organizational Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of individuals and groups in an organizational setting. The course will help the student develop an understanding of the organizational behaviour concepts and the interaction between individual determinants of behaviour and group dynamics. Prerequisite: AUMGT 200.
AUMGT 360 Hockey: Culture and Commerce Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the cultural and business aspects of the sport of hockey, historically and in the present. The course explores such topics as fan identities, cultural memory and tradition, race and ethnicity, gender and youth culture, labour relations and free agency, salary caps and revenue sharing, minor hockey, audiences and the mass media, fighting and violence, league expansion and franchise relocations, and arena construction. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200 or consent of the instructor, third-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 360 and AUPED 360.
AUMGT 380 Selected Topics in Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Management. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200 or consent of instructor. Notes: Minimum third year standing.
AUMGT 381 Selected Topics in Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Management. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200 or consent of instructor. Notes: Minimum third year standing.
AUMGT 399 Management Internship Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Students will combine work experience with academic study through the development and completion of an internship program related to management. As part of the internship, students are required to complete a major project related to their work. Prerequisites: AUMGT 200, third year standing and consent of the instructor.
AUMGT 422 Industrial Organization and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of oligopoly theory, the economics of mergers and takeovers, competition policy, and industry regulation. Prerequisites: AUECO 203 and one of AUECO 323 and AUMGT 323. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 422 and AUECO 422.
AUMGT 490 Business Policy and Strategy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Capstone course for the Management in Business Economics program. The course helps the student develop overall directions of an organization and mobilize human and other resources to accomplish strategic goals. The skills, concepts, and tools learned in various courses form the framework for making strategic decision. Prerequisite: Completion of all other courses in the Management Foundations, or consent of program adviser. Notes: Open only to a student in the Bachelor of Management in Business Economics Program.
#
Augustana Faculty - Mathematics
AUMAT
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUMAT 101 Preparation for Calculus Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of the mathematical background essential to success in Elementary Calculus I, as well as an introduction to some of the central concepts of calculus. Review topics include polynomials, rational expressions, exponents and logarithms, the real number line, the Cartesian plane, trigonometry, and functions and their graphs. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1. Note: Normally offered as a nine-week course in the latter portion of the first term. Students with unsatisfactory performance through the first four weeks of AUMAT 110 may be permitted to withdraw from that course and register in the next offering of AUMAT 101. Students obtaining credit in in AUMAT 101 are strongly encouraged to attempt the next offering of AUMAT 110. Not open to students with credit in AUMAT 110, 111, or 116, and normally not open to a student with credit in Mathematics 31. The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Mathematics.
AUMAT 107 Higher Arithmetic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elementary number theory, numeration systems, number systems, sets, logic, and elementary probability theory. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2, or consent of the instructor. Notes: The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Mathematics, nor may it be used for credit towards a B.Sc. degree. Credit may not be obtained for AUMAT 107 if credit has already been obtained for AUMAT 250.
AUMAT 110 Elementary Calculus I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1.5s-0). Limits; differentiation and integration of algebraic, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions; applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 110, 111 and 116. Students with credit in Mathematics 31 who score 80% or more on the Calculus Placement Test should take AUMAT 116 instead of AUMAT 110. Students with unsatisfactory performance through the first four weeks of the course may be permitted to withdraw and register in the next offering of AUMAT 101.
AUMAT 112 Elementary Calculus II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Fundamental Theorem, inverse trigonometric functions and their derivatives, indeterminate forms, improper integrals, techniques of integration, applications. Prerequisite: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116.
AUMAT 116 Elementary Calculus I (Enriched) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Limits; differentiation and integration of algebraic, trigonometric, exponential, logarithmic, and inverse trigonometric functions; Fundamental Theorem; linear approximation, Taylor polynomials and series; applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 and Mathematics 31. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 116, 110 and 111. Students who score less than 80% on the Calculus Placement Test should take AUMAT 110 instead of AUMAT 116.
AUMAT 120 Linear Algebra I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Vector and matrix algebra, determinants, linear systems of equations, vector spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1.
AUMAT 211 Intermediate Calculus I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Infinite series, plane curves, polar coordinates, vectors and three-dimensional analytic geometry, cylindrical and spherical coordinates, elements of linear differential equations. Prerequisite: AUMAT 112.
AUMAT 212 Intermediate Calculus II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, integration in two and three dimensions, vector functions, space curves, arc length, line integrals, Green’s theorem, surface integrals, Stokes’ theorem, the divergence theorem. Prerequisite: AUMAT 211.
AUMAT 220 Linear Algebra II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Vector spaces, bases, linear transformations, change of bases, eigenvectors, characteristic polynomials, diagonalization, inner products and Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, orthogonal and unitary operators. Prerequisites: AUMAT 120 and one of 110 or 111 or 116.
AUMAT 229 Introduction to Group Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Groups as a measure of symmetry. Groups of rigid motions. Frieze groups, and finite groups in two and three dimensions. Groups of matrices. Group actions with application to counting problems. Permutation groups. Subgroups, cosets, and Lagrange’s Theorem. Quotient groups and homomorphisms. Prerequisites: AUMAT 120 and one of 110 or 111 or 116.
AUMAT 235 Mathematics in Economics and Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mathematical analysis of problems arising in economics and finance, including an introduction to economic modelling; simple, compound, and continuous rates of interest; static and comparative-static analysis; optimization; annuities, mortgages, bonds, and other securities; and dynamics. Prerequisites: AUECO 101 and one of AUMAT 110, 111, 116. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 235, AUECO 206, AUMGT 206.
AUMAT 250 Discrete Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Sets, functions, elementary propositional and predicate logic, Boolean algebra, elementary graph theory, proof techniques (including induction and contradiction), and combinatorics. Prerequisites: AUMAT 110 or 111, or 116, and 120.
AUMAT 260 Topics in Geometry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Axiomatic systems and finite geometries; Euclidean geometry and modern synthetic geometry, including Euclid’s and Hilbert’s axioms, Menelaus’ and Ceva’s theorems, the nine-point circle, and Morley’s theorem; constructions; isometries of the plane and groups of transformations; non-Euclidean geometry; applications. Prerequisite: AUMAT 120 or consent of the instructor.
AUMAT 315 Complex Variables Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Complex numbers, functions of a complex variable, analytic functions, Cauchy and related theorems, Taylor and Laurent expansions, the residue calculus and applications, harmonic functions, conformal mapping, applications. Prerequisite: AUMAT 212.
AUMAT 330 Ordinary Differential Equations Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). First- and higher-order equations; methods of solution, including complex variable techniques; series solutions; elementary transform techniques; oscillation theory; applications to biology and physics. Prerequisite: AUMAT 120, 211.
AUMAT 332 Mathematical Ecology and Dynamical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mathematical analysis of problems associated with ecology, including models of population growth (e.g., discrete, continuous, age- structured, limited carrying capacity), the population dynamics of ecosystems, the spread of epidemics, the transport of pollutants, and the sustainable harvesting of vegetation and animal populations. Fundamental concepts of discrete and continuous dynamical systems, both linear and nonlinear. Prerequisites: AUMAT 120 and 211.
AUMAT 340 Numerical Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Computer arithmetic and errors, solution of systems of linear equations, root finding, interpolation, numerical quadrature, and numerical solutions of ordinary differential equations. Applications from physics are included. Prerequisites: AUCSC 111, AUMAT 120, AUMAT 112; or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 340, AUCSC 340, AUPHY 340.
AUMAT 355 Theory of Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Models of computers including finite automata and Turing machines, computability, basics of formal languages with applications to the syntax of programming languages, unsolvable problems and their relevance to the semantics of programming, and concepts of computational complexity, including algorithm optimality. Prerequisite: AUCSC 112 and AUMAT 250. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 355 and AUCSC 315.
AUMAT 395 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific mathematical problem or other area of mathematics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Notes: Admission to AUMAT 395 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 on the major in Mathematics and Physics. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUMAT 480 History of Mathematics and Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integrated history of mathematics and physics, emphasizing the scientific revolution and the subsequent development of mathematics and physics as distinct disciplines. Prerequisite: AUMAT 211 and one of AUMAT 220, 229, 250. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMAT 480, 380, AUPHY 380, 480.
AUMAT 495 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific problem or area of mathematics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing. Notes: Admission to AUMAT 495 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 on the major in Mathematics and Physics. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Music
AUMUS
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUMUS 100 Introduction to Music Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of music, including notation, rudiments, and elementary harmonic progressions. Prerequisite: Completion of the Music Theory Placement Examination (MTPE) or consent of the instructor. Notes: The course is not open to a student scoring 70% or more on the MTPE. The course does not count toward any major, or minor in Music.
AUMUS 140 Augustana Choir Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor based on audition. Notes: a *1.5 course over the winter term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 141 The Augustana Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Notes: Not open to a part-time student who has less than one year of the degree program completed. A *3 course over the full year. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 142 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Notes: a *1 course over the fall term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 143 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the winter term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 144 Choral Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *2 course over the full year. The course does not require participation in a performance tour.
AUMUS 149 Instrumental Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Includes participation in all scheduled concert events. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Instrumental Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *2 course over the full year.
AUMUS 160 Theoretical and Analytical Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of common-practice harmony: scales and modes, intervals, triads, figured bass, cadences, nonharmonic tones, harmonic progression and rhythm, part-writing, seventh chords, diatonic modulation. Prerequisites: AUMUS 100 or a score higher than 70% in the Music Theory Placement Examination (MTPE), and completion of the Keyboard Skills Interview (KSI). Corequisite: AUMUS 162.
AUMUS 162 Aural and Sight Singing Skills I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 2-1L-0). Development of listening and reading skills integral to the internalization of concepts covered in AUMUS 160. Prerequisites: AUMUS 100 or a score higher than 70% in the Music Theory Placement Examination (MTPE), and completion of the Keyboard Skills Interview (KSI). Corequisite: AUMUS 160.
AUMUS 170 Tuning In: An Introduction to Music Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Development of listening approaches and techniques for understanding and appreciating a variety of Western and non-Western music, and an examination of the ideologies that prompt the sampling of such music. Music studied includes Western art music, African music, First Nations music, North Indian music, and popular music.
AUMUS 188 Concerto Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a partial concerto or, for singers, a work or group of works normally performed with orchestra; one-hour weekly lesson offered over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: Restricted to Piano and Voice performance majors in their first year. A student should consult the Department of Fine Arts before registering.
AUMUS 189 Service Playing Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private keyboard lessons in the playing of hymns and chants, liturgies, conducting from the keyboard, transcription, improvisations, and transposition; a half-hour lesson weekly over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to Liturgical Arts majors. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 190 Applied Music Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 191 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 192 Applied Music Œ1.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three-quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 193 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 194 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (either term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 195 Applied Music Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 196 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (first term, 0-2.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson in the fall term for a student exhibiting advanced abilities in music performance. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering. The following courses must be taken in consecutive fall/winter terms: AUMUS 196 and 197.
AUMUS 197 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (second term, 0-2.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson in the winter term for a student exhibiting advanced abilities in music performance. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering. The following courses must be taken in consecutive fall/winter terms: AUMUS 196 and 197.
AUMUS 221 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A selected topics course in music that may focus on a range of possible areas of study, from performance to musicology to conducting. This course may also include a tour component. Prerequisite(s): AUMUS 170 or permission of the instructor.
AUMUS 224 Medieval and Renaissance Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of Western European art music through the medieval and Renaissance periods. Prerequisite: AUMUS 170 or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 225 Baroque and Classical Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of Western European art music of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in the context of general cultural history. Prerequisite: AUMUS 170 or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 226 Romantic and Twentieth-Century Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Music from early Romanticism to the present. Both musicological and interdisciplinary analytical approaches are emphasized. Prerequisite: AUMUS 170 or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 227 History of Vocal Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of vocal literature from the seventeenth century to the present.
AUMUS 229 History of Piano Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of piano literature from the seventeenth century to the present.
AUMUS 231 Lyric Diction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). A study of the International Phonetic Alphabet, anatomy and physiology of basic phonetics, and accepted principles of lyric diction as they apply to the four languages most commonly used in concert and operatic repertoire: French, German, Italian and English. Corequisite: An AUMUS Applied Music - Vocal course.
AUMUS 235 Introduction to Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental conducting techniques as applied to instrumental and vocal music. Prerequisite: AUMUS 160 and 162, or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 236 Introduction to Choral Techniques, Literature, and Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to choral techniques, interpretation, and choral literature. Prerequisite: AUMUS 235 or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 238 Piano Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles, methods, and techniques for teaching piano with a survey of various pedagogical schools of thought. Prerequisite: AUMUS 160 or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 239 Vocal Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1L-0). Comprehensive study of the voice and how it functions, survey of current methods, and supervised practical instruction. Prerequisite: Applied music in voice at the 200 level, or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 240 Augustana Choir Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor based on audition. Notes: a *1.5 course over the winter term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 241 The Augustana Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Notes: Not open to a part-time student who has less than one year of the degree program completed. A *3 course over the full year. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 242 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Notes: a *1 course over the fall term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 243 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the winter term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 244 Choral Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *2 course over the full year. The course does not require participation in a performance tour.
AUMUS 249 Instrumental Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Includes participation in all scheduled concert events. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Instrumental Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *2 course over the full year.
AUMUS 260 Theoretical and Analytical Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of the study of common-practice harmony, including secondary dominants, borrowed chords, chromatic and enharmonic modulations, and extended chords. Prerequisite: AUMUS 160. Corequisite: AUMUS 262.
AUMUS 261 Theoretical and Analytical Studies III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of common-practice harmony, including Neapolitan sixths, augmented sixths, altered dominants, and chromatically altered chords; modulations to foreign keys and third-relation harmony; polychords, modal mixture, and extended chromaticism. Prerequisite: AUMUS 260. Corequisite: AUMUS 263.
AUMUS 262 Aural and Sight Singing Skills II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 2-1L-0). Development of listening and reading skills integral to the internalization of concepts covered in AUMUS 260. Prerequisite: AUMUS 162. Corequisite: AUMUS 260.
AUMUS 263 Aural and Sight Singing Skills III Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 2-1L-0). Development of listening and reading skills integral to the internalization of concepts covered in AUMUS 261. Prerequisites: AUMUS 260 and 262. Corequisite: AUMUS 261.
AUMUS 265 Introduction to Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Exploration, through written exercises and assignments, of the development of compositional systems, processes, and techniques related to twentieth-century musical idioms. Prerequisite: AUMUS 160 or consent of the instructor. Note: A *3 course offered over the full year.
AUMUS 288 Concerto Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a partial concerto or, for singers, a work or group of works normally performed with orchestra; one-hour weekly lesson offered over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: Restricted to Piano and Voice performance majors in their second year. A student should consult the Department of Fine Arts before registering.
AUMUS 289 Service Playing Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private keyboard lessons in the playing of hymns and chants, liturgies, conducting from the keyboard, transcription, improvisations, and transposition; a half-hour lesson weekly over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to Liturgical Arts majors. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 290 Applied Music Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 291 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 292 Applied Music Œ1.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three-quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 293 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 294 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (either term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 295 Applied Music Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 296 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 0-2.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson in the fall term for a student exhibiting advanced abilities in music performance. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering. The following courses must be taken in consecutive fall/winter terms: AUMUS 296 and 297.
AUMUS 297 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 0-2.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson in the winter term for a student exhibiting advanced abilities in music performance. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering. The following courses must be taken in consecutive fall/winter terms: AUMUS 296 and 297.
AUMUS 298 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 299 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE). A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 322 Rethinking Music: From Mozart to Madonna Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to current issues in musicological thought. The course examines traditional ways of thinking about music, and considers issues such as the role of the symbol in language and music, cultural studies, ethnomusicology, the scholarly devaluation of popular music, feminist theory, and analyses of rock videos. Prerequisite: *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor. Note: Students from a variety of musical backgrounds (popular or classical) are encouraged to enrol.
AUMUS 327 History of Vocal Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of vocal literature from the seventeenth century to the present.
AUMUS 329 History of Piano Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of piano literature from the seventeenth century to the present.
AUMUS 330 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 331 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 332 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 333 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 334 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 335 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to the theory, history and practise within a music performance discipline. Prerequisites: Second year standing.
AUMUS 336 Advanced Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continued development of conducting techniques as applied to choral music. Prerequisite: AUMUS 235.
AUMUS 337 Choral Conducting Summer Intensive: A Holistic Approach Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-3s-0). A holistic approach to choral conducting that embraces all facets of choral direction, including body awareness and exploration, vocal development and technique, conducting technique, score reading and analysis, musicianship, choral pedagogy, repertoire and rehearsal techniques. Ample opportunity is provided for individual attention as well as group dialogue and discussion. Participants conduct a resident lab choir on a daily basis. Prerequisite: AUMUS 336 or consent of the department.
AUMUS 339 Vocal Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1L-0). Comprehensive study of the voice and how it functions, survey of current methods, and supervised practical instruction. Prerequisite: Applied music in voice at the 200 level, or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 340 Augustana Choir Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor based on audition. Notes: a *1.5 course over the winter term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 341 The Augustana Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Notes: Not open to a part-time student who has less than one year of the degree program completed. A *3 course over the full year. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 342 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Notes: a *1 course over the fall term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 343 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the winter term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 344 Choral Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *2 course over the full year. The course does not require participation in a performance tour.
AUMUS 347 Chamber Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Varies in constitution (e.g., voice and piano, woodwind trio, brass quartet) from year to year. The repertoire to be performed is decided by the students and instructor. The ensemble prepares and performs under the guidance of the instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Division. Notes: An “Application for Chamber Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *3 course over the full year.
AUMUS 349 Instrumental Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Includes participation in all scheduled concert events. Prerequisite: Consent of the Division. Notes: An “Application for Instrumental Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *2 course over the full year.
AUMUS 361 Form, Analysis, and the Construction of Musical Meaning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of music through harmonic, contrapuntal and structural analysis of selected pieces from the Baroque to Romantic periods. Includes the examination of prominent musical features and harmonic devices within common small- and large-scale forms. Offers a critique of the applications and limitations of conventional musical analysis. Prerequisite: AUMUS 261.
AUMUS 369 Retheorizing Music: From Modernism to Postmodernism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examination of technical and stylistic perspectives from Modernist art music techniques established before 1950 to those found in art, popular, and world music in the twenty-first century. Included are exercises in composition and performance as well as training in related listening, sight singing, and score-reading skills. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and 263.
AUMUS 375 Co-op Education Studies I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (variable, 1-3.5L-0). Placement of a student with an employer organization for work experience. The practicum is designed by the student, supervising faculty member, and supervising organizational director, to integrate the liberal arts study of music with work experience in appropriate fields of business, industry, government, and the professions. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Co-op Education Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUMUS 376 Directed Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Individual research project in a specific area of study as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Third- or fourth-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUMUS 388 Concerto Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a complete concerto or, for singers, a work or group of works normally performed with orchestra; one-hour weekly lesson offered over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: Restricted to Piano and Voice performance majors in their third year. A student should consult the Department of Fine Arts before registering.
AUMUS 389 Service Playing Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private keyboard lessons in the playing of hymns and chants, liturgies, conducting from the keyboard, transcription, improvisations, and transposition; a half-hour lesson weekly over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to Liturgical Arts majors. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 390 Applied Music Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 391 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 392 Applied Music Œ1.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three-quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 393 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 394 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (either term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 395 Applied Music Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 396 Performance Studies I Œ3 (fi 9) (variable, 0-3L-0). Formal recital (minimum duration: 45 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Corequisite: AUMUS 395.
AUMUS 397 Applied Music Œ7 (fi 17) (two term, 0-2L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a formal recital (minimum duration: 45 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: This course is restricted to Liturgical Arts, Musical Arts, Piano, and Voice majors in the Bachelor of Music program.
AUMUS 398 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 399 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE). A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 422 Rethinking Music: From Mozart to Madonna Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to current issues in musicological thought. The course examines traditional ways of thinking about music, and considers issues such as the role of the symbol in language and music, cultural studies, ethnomusicology, the scholarly devaluation of popular music, feminist theory, and analyses of rock videos. Prerequisite: *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor. Note: Students from a variety of musical backgrounds (popular or classical) are encouraged to enrol.
AUMUS 430 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 431 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 432 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 433 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 434 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 435 Selected Topics in Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected topics related to music history, music theory, and ethnomusicology. Topics vary from year to year and may include such diverse areas as world music, cultural and critical theory, popular music, music video, jazz, Eurowestern style periods, genres, composers, performers, audiences, set theory, and Schenkarian analysis. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and *6 from AUMUS 224, 225, 226; or consent of the instructor.
AUMUS 440 Augustana Choir Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor based on audition. Notes: a *1.5 course over the winter term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 441 The Augustana Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Notes: Not open to a part-time student who has less than one year of the degree program completed. A *3 course over the full year. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 442 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the fall term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 443 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the winter term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 444 Choral Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *2 course over the full year. The course does not require participation in a performance tour.
AUMUS 447 Chamber Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Varies in constitution (e.g., voice and piano, woodwind trio, brass quartet) from year to year. The repertoire to be performed is decided by the students and instructor. The ensemble prepares and performs under the guidance of the instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Chamber Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *3 course over the full year.
AUMUS 449 Instrumental Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Includes participation in all scheduled concert events. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Instrumental Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *2 course over the full year.
AUMUS 469 Retheorizing Music: From Modernism to Postmodernism Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Examination of technical and stylistic perspectives from Modernist art music techniques established before 1950 to those found in art, popular, and world music in the twenty-first century. Included are exercises in composition and performance as well as training in related listening, sight singing, and score-reading skills. Prerequisites: AUMUS 261 and 263.
AUMUS 475 Co-op Education Studies II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (variable, 1-3.5L-0). Placement of a student with an employer organization for work experience. The practicum is designed by the student, supervising faculty member, and supervising organizational director to integrate the liberal arts study of music with work experience in appropriate fields of business, industry, government, and the professions. Prerequisites: Fourth-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An Application for Co-op Education Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUMUS 476 Directed Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Individual research project in a specific area of study as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUMUS 376 and consent of the instructor. Note: An Application for Individual Study must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUMUS 488 Concerto Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a complete concerto or, for singers, a work or group of works normally performed with orchestra; one-hour weekly lesson offered over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: Restricted to Piano and Voice performance majors in their fourth year. A student should consult the Department of Fine Arts before registering.
AUMUS 489 Service Playing Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private keyboard lessons in the playing of hymns and chants, liturgies, conducting from the keyboard, transcription, improvisations, and transposition; a half-hour lesson weekly over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to Liturgical Arts majors. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 490 Applied Music Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 491 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 492 Applied Music Œ1.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three-quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 493 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 494 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (either term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 495 Applied Music Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 496 Performance Studies II Œ3 (fi 9) (variable, 0-3L-0). Formal recital (minimum duration: 60 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Corequisite: AUMUS 495.
AUMUS 497 Applied Music Œ7 (fi 17) (two term, 0-2L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a formal recital (minimum duration: 60 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: This course is restricted to Liturgical Arts, Musical Arts, Piano, and Voice majors in the Bachelor of Music program.
AUMUS 498 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 499 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 540 Augustana Choir Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor based on audition. Notes: a *1.5 course over the winter term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 541 Augustana Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4.5L-0). Performance of choral music for mixed choir, including required participation in a performance tour which may follow the winter term. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor, based on audition. Notes: A *3 course over the full year. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 542 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Notes: a *1 course over the fall term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 543 Choral Ensemble Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *1 course over the winter term. The course does not require participation in a performance tour. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUMUS 544 Choral Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-2L-0). Performance of choral music. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: A *2 course over the full year. The course does not require participation in a performance tour.
AUMUS 547 Chamber Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Varies in constitution (e.g., voice and piano, woodwind trio, brass quartet) from year to year. The repertoire to be performed is decided by the students and instructor. The ensemble prepares and performs under the guidance of the instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Chamber Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *3 course over the full year.
AUMUS 549 Instrumental Ensemble Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1.5L-0). Includes participation in all scheduled concert events. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: An “Application for Instrumental Ensemble Studies” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. A *2 course over the full year.
AUMUS 588 Concerto Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a complete concerto or, for singers, a work or group of works normally performed with orchestra; one-hour weekly lesson offered over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: Restricted to Piano and Voice performance majors in their fifth year. A student should consult the Department of Fine Arts before registering.
AUMUS 590 Applied Music Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 591 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 592 Applied Music Œ1.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three-quarter-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 593 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0-0.75L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a three- quarter-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 594 Applied Music Œ2 (fi 7) (either term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 595 Applied Music Œ4 (fi 11) (two term, 0-1L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice; a one-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 596 Performance Studies II Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 0-3L-0). Formal recital (minimum duration: 60 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Corequisite: AUMUS 595.
AUMUS 597 Applied Music Œ7 (fi 17) (two term, 0-2L-0). Private lessons in instrument or voice and the presentation of a formal recital (minimum duration: 60 minutes) prepared under the guidance of the instructor and marked by a jury. Participation in group master classes is required. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Note: This course is restricted to Liturgical Arts, Musical Arts, Piano, and Voice majors in the Bachelor of Music program.
AUMUS 598 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ1 (fi 5) (either term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over one term. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
AUMUS 599 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ2 (fi 7) (two term, 0-0.5L-0). Private piano lessons; a half-hour weekly lesson over two terms. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Notes: Restricted to students who want to develop specific skills required to pass the Keyboard Skills Proficiency Examination (KSPE), and to International Program students. A student should consult the Fine Arts Department before registering.
#
Augustana Faculty - Philosophy
AUPHI
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPHI 101 Introduction to Western Philosophy I: Ancient and Medieval Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the main problems and theories that have dominated philosophical thought, through study and critical discussion of selected classics of ancient and medieval philosophy.
AUPHI 102 Introduction to Western Philosophy II: Modern Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of an introduction to the main problems and theories that have dominated philosophical thought, through study and critical discussions of selected classics of modern philosophy.
AUPHI 180 Critical Thinking Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elementary methods and principles for distinguishing correct from incorrect reasoning. Topics may include informal fallacies, introduction to the scientific method, elementary formal logic, rational decision procedures, and analysis of arguments.
AUPHI 200 Metaphysics: Theories of Reality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of traditional and contemporary topics such as Being and Nonbeing, the nature of time, freedom, appearance and reality, persons, and the mind-body problem.
AUPHI 210 Epistemology: Theories of Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of such central topics in epistemology as foundationalism, truth and rationality, skepticism and the limits of knowledge, relativism and the objectivity of knowledge, evidence and verifiability, and belief and justification.
AUPHI 226 Existentialism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the main themes and perspectives in recent existential philosophy. Authors such as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Sartre, Heidegger Mounier, and Camus may be considered. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 226 and AUPHI 326 (2013).
AUPHI 228 Philosophy Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Philosophy. Prerequisite: Second year standing in a Philosophy and Religion degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Philosophy that requires library research. Notes: The corequisites must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 228, AUART 228, AUHIS 285, AUREL 228.
AUPHI 240 Ancient Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical survey of the development of political and social philosophy, focusing on classical Greece and Rome. Authors studied will include Plato and Aristotle. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 210 and AUPHI 240.
AUPHI 241 Modern Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and critical survey of the political ideas of modern Europe, from the end of the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century. Authors studied may include Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Wollstonecraft and Marx. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 211 and AUPHI 241.
AUPHI 250 History of Christian Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of Christian thought from its Judaic and Hellenistic origins up to and including the twentieth century.
AUPHI 260 Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of questions of right and wrong, good and evil, and reasons for action, through study of ethical theories of philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, Kant, and Mill.
AUPHI 277 Women, Darkness and Crooked Things: Feminist Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to feminist issues in philosophy.
AUPHI 290 Philosophy of Contemporary Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of contemporary culture, both “popular” and “literate” (film, theatre, music, writing).
AUPHI 311 Ancient Greek Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of ancient Greek philosophy from its origins with the Pre-Socratics up to and including Plato and Aristotle. Prerequisites: AUPHI 101 and 102 preferred, but not necessary. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 311 and AUCLA 310.
AUPHI 320 Hermeneutics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the philosophical theories about the nature of interpretation and understanding. Themes and texts are selected from the writings of Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Heidegger, Gadamer, Ricoeur, Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze, and others. Themes may include our relationship to authors, to sacred texts, and to nature. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 320 and AUPHI 420 (2013).
AUPHI 325 Phenomenology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the phenomenological method, its history in the twentieth-century, and its contemporary possibilities. Themes and texts are selected from the writings of Husserl as well as from those of Heidegger, Schütz, Stein, Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, Patocka , Young, and others. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 325 and AUPHI 425 (2013).
AUPHI 336 Nineteenth-Century Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Main currents of thought of the nineteenth century and the ideological conflicts that our own age has inherited from its predecessors. Particular attention is given to the social and political aspects of the philosophical systems of Hegel, Kierkegaard, Marx, Darwin, and Nietzsche.
AUPHI 340 Contemporary Social and Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the major formulations and problems of Western social and political thought in the twentieth and twenty-first century, dealing with topics ranging from governance to social relationships. Prerequisite: AUPHI 240 or 241, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 310 and AUPHI 340.
AUPHI 345 Philosophy in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of texts by historical or contemporary philosophical figures in Canada, centred on a chosen theme, in relation to the Canadian cultural and institutional context, and drawing from a multidisciplinary perspective on philosophy.
AUPHI 350 Philosophy of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Philosophical approach to the presuppositions, attitudes, language, practices, and goals of the physical and social sciences. Topics may include theory evaluation, explanation, and the nature of scientific law.
AUPHI 351 Thinking About Sex: Philosophy, Science, and the Construction of Sex Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines philosophical issues raised by scientific research into sex, sexual orientation, and gender.
AUPHI 355 Philosophy and the Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of the philosophical and social issues related to technology and the environment. Topics may include the natural/artificial distinction, different meanings of “environment”, the ways we understand, package, and manage nature as well as issues in environmental ethics and aesthetics. May include texts by Western and Indigenous thinkers. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 355 and AUENV 355.
AUPHI 357 Philosophy of Religion I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the philosophy of religion by focusing on the question, “What is religion?” Through lectures, discussion, and reading of such thinkers as Schleiermacher, Feuerbach, Kierkegaard, and Otto, the course explores the concept of religion; the existence of God (and related proofs); meaning in religious language; and the relations between faith and reason, philosophy and religion. Prerequisite: None, but AUPHI 102 or 336 would be useful.
AUPHI 358 Philosophy of Religion II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Continuation of the exploration of religion and religious experience undertaken in AUPHI 357. Consideration is given to various forms of spirituality as found in the writings of Christian and non-Christian mystics and religious thinkers such as Eckhart, Shankara, and Starhawk. Prerequisite: AUPHI 357 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 365 Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Considerations of theoretical issues related to visual arts, broadly understood and of sense experience.
AUPHI 366 Place and Space Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of concepts, experiences and representations of place and space through the study of philosophical texts and other relevant sources.
AUPHI 390 Indigenous Thought: First Nations Thought and Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines core issues in Indigenous thought and knowledge.
AUPHI 392 World Philosophy: Comparing Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of philosophy as it takes place outside Europe and North America and outside the Western canon. Topics may include: relationship between philosophy, culture, and spirituality; tradition; reason; language; communitarianism and individualism; nonduality; colonialism; government and power; as well as topics proper to local philosophical traditions. Geographical areas covered vary from year to year.
AUPHI 422 Philosophy, Religion and Public Life Research Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation of a literature review, research proposal, and presentation of a public life issue that will be explored from philosophical and/or religious perspectives. Research may be participatory archival, or community based. It may include a community service learning component. Classes provide supportive and critical analysis throughout the student’s work and research process. Prerequisite: Third or fourth-year standing. Notes: Open only to students with a major in Philosophy and Religion. This course can be taken only by a student who is also registered in AUPHI 423. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 422 and AUREL 432.
AUPHI 423 Philosophy, Religion and Public Life Research Seminar II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Continuation of AUPHI 422. This course involves implementing research, presentation of results, and a final writing project. Research may be participatory, archival, or community based. Classes provide supportive and critical analysis throughout the student’s work and research process. Prerequisites: AUPHI 422; third or fourth-year standing. Note: Open only to students with a major in Philosophy and Religion. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 423 and AUREL 433.
AUPHI 459 Philosophy of Western Mysticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the mystic tradition in the West, including Plotinus, Pseudo-Dionysius, Bonaventure, Eckhart and the Rhineland mystics, Jacob Boehme, and the Kaballah. On the basis of these sources, questions such as the following are addressed: What is the nature of mystical experience? What is mystical “knowledge”? Is mysticism rational? Are there types of mysticism? How can mysticism and morality be related? Prerequisite: AUPHI 357 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 490 Selected Topics in the History of Philosophy I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of a theme, philosopher, philosophical movement, or philosophical period. Prerequisite: AUPHI 102 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 491 Selected Topics in the History of Philosophy II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of a theme, philosopher, philosophical movement, or philosophical period. Prerequisite: AUPHI 102 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 492 Selected Topics in the History of Philosophy III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of a theme, philosopher, philosophical movement, or philosophical period. Prerequisite: AUPHI 102 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 493 Selected Topics in the History of Philosophy IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth study of a theme, philosopher, philosophical movement, or philosophical period. Prerequisite: AUPHI 102 or consent of the instructor.
AUPHI 495 Directed Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Philosophy as defined by a student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *9 at a senior level in Philosophy and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPHI 496 Directed Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Philosophy as defined by a student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *9 at a senior level in Philosophy and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPHI 497 Directed Studies III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Philosophy as defined by a student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *9 at a senior level in Philosophy and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Physical Activity
AUPAC
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPAC 102 Golf Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to the fundamental skills (driving, iron play, chipping, pitching and putting) and rules of golf.
AUPAC 103 Tennis Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 109 Cross-Country Skiing Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 114 Dance Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 123 Aquatics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 124 Badminton Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 125 Canoeing Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0). Note: Not open to students with credit in AUPAC 226.
AUPAC 131 Curling Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 133 Strength Training Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 134 Indoor Climbing Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 151 Track and Field Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 152 Luge Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 161 Gymnastics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 171 Indoor Soccer Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to the fundamental skills and rules of indoor soccer.
AUPAC 173 Football Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 175 Ice Hockey Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to the fundamental skills, tactics and rules of ice hockey. Notes: In order to register for this course, a student must be able to skate and must provide their own skates, stick, hockey gloves, helmet, elbow pads and shin pads.
AUPAC 177 Soccer Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 178 Basketball Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 179 Volleyball Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 180 Softball (Fast Pitch) Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 181 Team Handball Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 191 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to selected physical activities.
AUPAC 192 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to selected physical activities.
AUPAC 193 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An introduction to selected physical activities.
AUPAC 209 Advanced Cross-Country Skiing Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 109.
AUPAC 224 Advanced Badminton Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 124.
AUPAC 225 Advanced Canoeing Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 125.
AUPAC 226 Moving Water Canoeing: Skill Development Œ3 (fi 6) (spring/summer, 0-3L-0). Corequisite: AUPED 286. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPAC 226 and AUPAC 326. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPAC 253 Advanced Luge Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 152.
AUPAC 270 Adventure Games Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0).
AUPAC 271 Advanced Indoor Soccer Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of team offence and defence, team play, rules of play and officiating. Prerequisite: AUPAC 171.
AUPAC 277 Advanced Soccer Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 177.
AUPAC 278 Advanced Basketball Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 178.
AUPAC 279 Advanced Volleyball Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 179.
AUPAC 291 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-3L-0). Advanced study and practice of selected physical activities. Prerequisite: Second-year standing: variable according to activity.
AUPAC 292 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-3L-0). Advanced study and practice of selected physical activities. Prerequisite: Second-year standing: variable according to activity.
AUPAC 293 Selected Topics in Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Advanced study and practice of selected physical activities. Prerequisite: Second-year standing: variable according to activity.
AUPAC 326 Moving Water Canoeing: Skill and Instructional Development Œ3 (fi 6) (spring/summer, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: AUPAC 125 or AUPED 284 or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPAC 226 or 326.
#
Augustana Faculty - Physical Education
AUPED
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPED 112 Structural Human Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Study of structure and function of selected systems of the human body (skeletal, muscular, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, and others).
AUPED 160 Sociocultural Aspects of Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the sociocultural dimensions of sport and physical activity. The course examines a variety of social institutions, processes, issues, and their relationship to sport and physical education in Canada and the United States. Topics include the emergence of modern sport, sport and culture, socialization, class and gender relations, race and ethnicity, government and politics, commercialization, the mass media, schools and universities, drugs and violence.
AUPED 184 Introduction to Outdoor Education - Snowshoeing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to winter travel skills of snowshoe, hand-hauled toboggan, and wall tent living. The course examines a variety of outdoor education theories and perspectives regarding leadership, group dynamics, and nature-human relationships. In addition, placed-based educational strategies will be used to develop a broad understanding of the expedition route. Note: The course requires participation on a multi-day overnight field trip. Students are required to provide personal outdoor clothing and equipment.
AUPED 185 Introduction to Ski Touring Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course includes a 1 week expedition. Opportunity for self-awareness and leadership development through outdoor tripping and small- group living. The students will learn skills associated with ski touring, traveling in avalanche terrain, telemark skiing, and Leave No Trace camping. Students will have an opportunity to obtain Canadian Avalanche Association Avalanche Safety Training level one certification. Prerequisites: One of AUPED 184, 283, 284 or 286 and successful completion of a ski competency test. Notes: A student must demonstrate basic competency in skiing (downhill or cross-country). The course requires participation in field trips. A student must furnish their own outdoor clothing and sleeping bag. Credit can be received for only one of AUPED 185 and AUPED 285. Requires payment of additional instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section in the Calendar.
AUPED 215 Introduction to Human Physiology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the function of the human body from the cellular to systemic level. All systems will be examined and will include those that meet changing energy demands during physical activity. Prerequisite: AUPED 112.
AUPED 216 Introduction to Human Physiology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A continuation of AUPED 215. Prerequisite: AUPED 215.
AUPED 220 Human Growth and Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the sequential changes in physical growth and motor development with emphasis on individual differences.
AUPED 222 Introduction to Movement Activities of Youth (Ages 5 - 12) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of a variety of movement activities, including play, games, gymnastics, and dance, in which children participate.
AUPED 232 Introduction to Biomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the application of physical laws to movement and structure. Principles of motion, force, and equilibrium are stressed. Various sport skills are examined from a biomechanical perspective. Prerequisite: AUPED 112.
AUPED 241 Lifetime Fitness and Wellness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-2s-0). Study of the theory and practice of adult physical fitness as it relates to health enhancement and preventive medicine. Emphasis is on opportunities to experience a variety of activities potentially capable of enriching lifestyle. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 241 and 245.
AUPED 245 Health and Wellness for Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine current health issues that influence wellness and healthy living. Students will be introduced to wellness models and theories and will be provided with opportunities to consider and understand personal health decisions. Topics will include: stress management, physical activity, health decision-making, nutrition, chronic disease and environmental health. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 245 and AUPED 241.
AUPED 251 Prevention and Care of Athletic Injuries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Study in the recognition and treatment of athletic injuries and vulnerable body structures, with emphasis on evaluation, modalities of treatment, rehabilitation, and current issues. Prerequisites: AUPED 112 and 215. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 251 and AUPED 351 (2014). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPED 261 Psychology of Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the psychological aspects of the competitive sports experience, with emphasis on the multidimensional factors involved in the psychology of sport.
AUPED 262 Sport, Physical Activity, and the Body: Historical Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of major themes in the history of sport, physical activity, and the body. Beginning with the ancient civilizations of Greece and Rome, the course explores the social, cultural, political, philosophical, religious, and economic factors that have influenced sport, physical education, and attitudes toward the body in various time periods. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 262 and AUHIS 212.
AUPED 266 Women in Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biomechanics, physiology, and psychology, along with related concerns of nutrition, injuries, menstrual function, and aging, as they affect women who participate in sport and physical activity. The relationship among sport, femininity, and sexuality is investigated.
AUPED 275 Introduction to Coaching Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comprehensive introduction to coaching principles, including sport psychology, training principles, sport pedagogy, ethics, and risk management.
AUPED 281 Explorations of the Canadian North Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). In this course students will examine the Canadian North from an experiential perspective. Students will study the many factors involved in an extended winter expedition in sub-arctic Canada and will spend two weeks in the North participating in dogsled expedition, seminars, personal narrative writing, and a variety of other outdoor activities. In addition, students will analyze narratives from the Canadian North, with a focus on the expedition region. This course includes a 17-day expedition during February Spring Break and the week following. Prerequisite: AUPED 184, 283, 284 or 286, or equivalent; consent of the instructor. Requires payment of additional instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section in the Calendar.
AUPED 282 Legal Liability and Risk Management in Physical Education, Sport and Outdoor Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to liability and risk dimensions of physical education, sport, and outdoor education programs. The course examines broad perspectives of legal and risk management issues involved in leading and planning physical education, sport and outdoor programs and events as well as methods for identifying, reducing, and managing risk at the personal and organizational level. Case studies will be used from the fields of teaching, coaching, outdoor education and adventure programs and events. Prerequisites: Second year standing.
AUPED 283 Introduction to Outdoor Education - Backpacking Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to theoretical and practical aspects of outdoor education. The course examines a variety of outdoor education theories and perspectives regarding leadership, group dynamics, and nature-human relationships. In addition, outdoor skills needed for wilderness backpacking will be developed. Note: The course requires participation on a multi-day overnight field trip. Students are required to provide personal outdoor clothing and equipment. Pre-requisite: second-year standing. Note: Credit may only be received for one of AUPED 283 and 284.
AUPED 284 Introduction to Outdoor Education - Canoeing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to theoretical and practical aspects of outdoor education. The course examines a variety of outdoor education theories and perspectives regarding leadership, group dynamics, and nature-human relationships. In addition, outdoor skills needed for wilderness canoe tripping will be developed. Note: The course requires participation on a multi-day overnight field trip. Students are required to provide personal outdoor clothing and equipment. Prerequisite: second-year standing. Note: Credit may only be received for one of AUPED 283 and 284.
AUPED 285 Introduction to Ski Touring Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Opportunity for self-awareness and personal and group leadership development through outdoor tripping and small-group living. The students will learn skills associated with ski touring, travel in avalanche terrain, telemark skiing, and Leave No Trace camping. Prerequisites: One of AUPED 184, 283, 284 or 286, and successful completion of a ski competency test. Notes: A student must demonstrate basic competency in skiing (downhill or cross-country). The course requires participation in field trips. A student must furnish their own outdoor clothing and sleeping bag. Credit can be received for only one of AUPED 185 and AUPED 285. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPED 286 Outdoor Education and Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (spring/summer, variable). Opportunity for self-awareness and personal and group leadership development through extended outdoor tripping and small-group living. The skills associated with intermediate/advanced backpacking, wilderness navigation, white water canoeing, and Leave No Trace camping are developed and practised. Prerequisites: AUPED 184, 283, 284 or equivalent; consent of the instructor. Corequisite: AUPAC 226 or 326. Notes: The course requires participation in field trips. A student must furnish their own outdoor clothing, footwear, and sleeping bag. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPED 290 Studies in Leadership Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the current theories, concepts, and issues of leadership. The course provides a student with a foundation for leadership practica.
AUPED 292 Physical Education Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-2). Practicum placement to gain awareness and experience in the leadership and instruction of physical education. Prerequisite: AUPED 290 or consent of the instructor. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Physical Education.
AUPED 294 Physical Education Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to Physical Education research skills. Prerequisite: Second-year standing or consent of the instructor. Corequisite: Any senior course in Physical Education that requires library research. Note: The corequisite must be taken concurrently.
AUPED 314 Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Study of the physiological response of the human body to acute exercise and to chronic exercise (training). Prerequisite: AUPED 215.
AUPED 317 Exercise in Special Populations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the use of physical activity in the treatment and/or prevention of chronic health conditions. There will be a particular focus on ageing, obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease in class, with an opportunity to explore the therapeutic use of exercise in other chronic conditions independently. Prerequisites: AUPED 216 or consent of the instructor.
AUPED 343 Training Methodologies and Athletic Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of current training and conditioning methodologies used to prepare athletes. The course emphasizes physiological adaptation, specificity, and factors that influence the training process. Prerequisites: AUPED 314. Notes: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Physical Education. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 342 (2014) and AUPED 343.
AUPED 344 Introduction to Human Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide a detailed overview of human nutrition by examining the roles of both macro and micronutrients in human health. It will discuss the recommended intakes and dietary sources of essential nutrients and provide a synopsis of their role in metabolism. Nutritional needs throughout the life cycle as well as those required for physical activity will be discussed. Prerequisites: AUPED 215 or AUBIO 280 or AUCHE 280.
AUPED 360 Hockey: Culture and Commerce Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the cultural and business aspects of the sport of hockey, historically and in the present. The course explores such topics as fan identities, cultural memory and tradition, race and ethnicity, gender and youth culture, labour relations and free agency, salary caps and revenue sharing, minor hockey, audiences and the mass media, fighting and violence, league expansion and franchise relocations, and arena construction. Prerequisites: Third-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUMGT 360 and AUPED 360.
AUPED 368 History of Sport in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the history of sport in Canadian society, from colonial times to the present. The course links developments in sport to wider changes in Canadian society and social relations. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 368 and AUHIS 368.
AUPED 369 The Modern Olympic Games Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the historical development of the modern Olympic Games. Topics include politics, nationalism, culture, commercialism, media, gender, race and identity. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPED 369 and AUHIS 312.
AUPED 370 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; second year standing. Note: AUPED 370 is classified as an arts course.
AUPED 371 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; third-year standing. Note: AUPED 371 is classified as an arts course.
AUPED 372 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; third-year standing. Note: AUPED 372 is classified as an arts course.
AUPED 373 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; third-year standing. Note: AUPED 373 is classified as an arts course.
AUPED 374 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; third-year standing. Note: AUPED 374 is classified as a science course.
AUPED 375 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of physical education and sport. Topics vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: Vary according to topic; third-year standing. Note: AUPED 375 is classified as a science course.
AUPED 383 Programming and Processing the Adventure Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the concepts and theories of adventure program planning and design as well as the concepts and theories of adventure program processing such as briefing and debriefing. Prerequisites: AUPED 389; one of AUPED 184, 281, 283, 284, 285, or 286.
AUPED 385 Advanced Ski Touring Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course follows the curriculum similar to the Canadian Avalanche Association Avalanche Safety Training Level II course. Specifically, students will learn to use the Avaluator(Trademark) tool, practise monitoring weather and snow conditions as well as logbook keeping, be able to identify and practise route finding and decision-making in avalanche terrain, develop and practise avalanche rescue, winter camping and telemark ski skills. The course includes a 5-10 day ski touring expedition. Prerequisite: AUPED 185 or 285.
AUPED 387 Arctic Expedition Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the many factors involved in extended Arctic canoe expeditions. The course uses an interdisciplinary approach to explore the biological, geographical, historical, and sociological aspects of the Canadian North. Students will plan and prepare for an extended Arctic canoe expedition. Prerequisites: One of AUPED 284 or 286, or one of AUPED 184 or 283 and AUPAC 191 (Introduction to Moving Water Canoeing); *3 in Geography and consent of the instructor. Notes: This course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUGEO 343 or AUPED 388. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 341, 342 and AUPED 387.
AUPED 388 Arctic Canoe Expedition Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). Examination, involving a three- to four-week expedition in the summer, of leadership, group dynamics, risk management, navigation, logistics, wilderness ethics, and other theories and practices associated with extended Arctic canoe expeditions. Prerequisites: AUGEO 341, 342 or AUPED 387; and consent of the instructor(s). Notes: Expedition costs, as well as course tuition, are the student’s responsibility. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGEO 343 and AUPED 388. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPED 389 Foundations of Outdoor, Adventure, and Experiential Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the historical and philosophical roots of outdoor, adventure, and experiential education. Prerequisite: One of AUPED 184, 281, 283, 284, 285, or 286.
AUPED 393 Tests and Measurements in Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Administration, construction, and analysis of tests and measurements utilized in health and physical education. Descriptive and inferential statistics are emphasized. Note: Students must have at least third year standing.
AUPED 414 Advanced Exercise and Occupational Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course, which covers acute and chronic response to exercise, and the underlying mechanisms of adaptation, will extend the students’ understanding of exercise physiology. It will also introduce the topic of occupational physiology. The students will have input into the topics selected for presentation and discussion. Topics that may be covered include the influence of exercise in the treatment of various disease states, and the physical requirement of various occupations and occupational testing. Prerequisite(s): AUPED 314. Note: This course was formerly (for 2 years) AUPED 375 (Special Topics in Physical Education and Sport); credit may be obtained for only one of these courses and AUPED 414.
AUPED 462 Issues in Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of issues as they relate to physical education and athletics. The emphasis is on developing a capability to reason and think critically on issues of importance to the discipline of Physical Education. Prerequisite: *12 in Physical Education; fourth-year standing.
AUPED 469 Sport and Canadian Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the role of sport in Canadian popular culture, historically and in the present. Topics include the power of the media to create audiences for sport; the role of sport in the construction of local, regional, and national identities; the continental dimensions of professional sport; the place of sport in the negotiation of gender relations; the use of sport by the Canadian government; and the position of sport in an increasingly global economy and culture.
AUPED 490 Directed Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Physical Education as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPED 491 Directed Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Physical Education as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPED 492 Directed Study III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Physical Education as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPED 493 Introduction to Research in Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to a set of skills that can be used to better comprehend the research literature and to recognize new questions that need to be researched. Concepts of validity, reliability, experimental design, statistical applications, and construction of proposals and theses are studied. Prerequisite: AUPED 393 and fourth-year standing.
AUPED 497 Directed Study IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Physical Education as defined by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisites: Third-year standing and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUPED 497 is classified as a science course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Physics
AUPHY
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPHY 102 Introductory General Physics I (Mechanics) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-2L-3/2). Noncalculus course in physics for a student without credit in Physics 30. Topics include vectors, forces in equilibrium, linear and rotational motion, dynamics of particles, and oscillations. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or consent of the instructor. Notes: AUPHY 102 does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Physics. The course is intended to be taken in sequence with AUPHY 106. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 102, 104, 110.
AUPHY 104 Introductory General Physics I (Mechanics) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Content is the same as that of AUPHY 102, but is designed for a student who has credit in Physics 30. Prerequisites: Physics 30 and Mathematics 30-1. Notes: The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Physics. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 104, 102, 110.
AUPHY 106 Introductory General Physics II (Wave Motion, Sound, Heat, and Optics) Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Properties of gases, liquids, and solids; wave motion and sound; heat and thermodynamics; geometrical and physical optics. Prerequisite: One of AUPHY 102, 104, 110. Notes: The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Physics. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 106, 120.
AUPHY 110 Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Vectors, kinematics, work, energy, momentum, dynamics, and periodic motion. Prerequisites: Physics 30 and Mathematics 30-1. Corequisite: AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 110, 102, 104.
AUPHY 120 Waves, Thermodynamics, and Optics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Oscillatory motion, waves on a string, sound waves, interference of waves, temperature, heat, entropy, first and second laws of thermodynamics, geometric optics, interference of light. Prerequisites: AUPHY 102 or 104 or 110; AUMAT 110 or 111 or 116. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 120, 106.
AUPHY 250 Electricity and Magnetism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Electric fields, Gauss’s law, magnetic fields, Ampere’s law, Faraday’s law, induction, direct and alternating currents. Prerequisites: AUPHY 110 and AUMAT 112.
AUPHY 260 Introduction to Relativity and Quantum Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special relativity; photons and matter waves; Bohr atom model; Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle; Schrödinger equation; one- dimensional systems; hydrogen atom; spin; Pauli Exclusion Principle; many-electron atoms; molecules. Prerequisites: AUPHY 120 and AUMAT 112. Corequisite: AUMAT 211 is recommended. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 260, AUCHE 277.
AUPHY 270 Astrophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The physics of the Universe. Observational methods. Stars, planetary systems, black holes, galaxies. Big Bang cosmology. Prerequisite: AUPHY 120.
AUPHY 310 Classical Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Vector calculus, Newtonian mechanics, oscillations, gravitation, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics. Prerequisites: AUPHY 120 and 250. Corequisites: AUMAT 212; AUMAT 330 is recommended.
AUPHY 321 Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Microscopic behaviour and quantum states; statistics of small and large systems; internal energy and equipartition; the laws of thermodynamics; thermal, mechanical, and diffusive interactions; introduction to classical and quantum statistics; Gibbs’ paradox; Maxwell’s relations. Prerequisites: AUPHY 120 and AUMAT 211. Corequisite: AUMAT 212 or 330 is recommended.
AUPHY 340 Numerical Methods in Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Computer arithmetic and errors, solution of systems of linear equations, root finding, interpolation, numerical quadrature, and numerical solutions of ordinary differential equations. Applications from physics are included. Prerequisite: AUCSC 111, AUMAT 120, AUPHY 120 or 250, AUMAT 112. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 340, AUCSC 340, AUMAT 340.
AUPHY 350 Electromagnetic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A vector calculus formulation of electrostatics, magnetostatics, and electrodynamics in free space, and an introduction to electromagnetic waves. Topics include: Lorentz force, Maxwell’s equations in differential form, potential formulations, and work, energy, and momentum. Prerequisite: AUPHY 250. Corequisite: AUMAT 212.
AUPHY 360 Quantum Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The breakdown of classical physics. Topics include: wave packets and uncertainty relations, the Schrodinger equation and simple systems, postulates and interpretation of quantum mechanics, operator methods, angular momentum and spin, central force problems and the hydrogen atom. Prerequisites: AUMAT 211; one of AUCHE 277, AUPHY 260. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCHE 377 and AUPHY 360.
AUPHY 391 Advanced Laboratory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Experiments in classical mechanics, electromagnetism, optics, and quantum mechanics. Measurement theory, experiment design and analysis, and scientific writing. Prerequisites: Any senior Physics course.
AUPHY 395 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific problem or area of physics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Notes: Admission to AUPHY 395 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 on the major in Mathematics and Physics. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUPHY 480 History of Physics and Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integrated history of mathematics and physics, emphasizing the scientific revolution and the subsequent development of mathematics and physics as distinct disciplines. Prerequisite: AUMAT 211 and one of AUPHY 250, 260, or AUCHE 277. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHY 480, 380, AUMAT 380, 480.
AUPHY 491 Advanced Laboratory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Experiments in classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, optics, and other senior physics topics. Prerequisite: AUPHY 291 (2016) or 391; consent of the instructor.
AUPHY 495 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). Intensive study of a specific problem or area of physics as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Fourth-year standing. Notes: Admission to AUPHY 495 normally requires a minimum GPA of 3.0 on the major in Mathematics and Physics. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Political Studies
AUPOL
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPOL 103 Introduction to Global and Political Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the ideas and key concepts that comprise the vocabulary of global and political studies. The course considers such ideas as democracy, order, power, authority, justice, freedom, development, globalization and equality. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 103 and AUPOL 103.
AUPOL 200 The Research Process Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to introduce students to the research process and various methodological approaches within political studies, while helping students to develop research and information literacy skills. Topics include: research design and communication, quantitative and qualitative methods, exploring and assessing sources of information, and various approaches to the study of politics. Prerequisite: AUPOL 103 or AUPOL 104.
AUPOL 210 History of Political Thought I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and critical survey of the development of political and social philosophy focusing on classical Greece and Rome, with selected readings from such major political writers as Plato, Aristotle, and Thucydides. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 210 and AUPHI 240.
AUPOL 211 History of Political Thought II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and critical survey of the political ideas of early-modern Europe, with readings from such selected major writers as Hobbes, Locke, Marx, and de Tocqueville. The course treats issues of authority, liberty, property, equality, and democracy. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, 210, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 211 and AUPHI 241.
AUPOL 215 Political Ideology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of political ideas and the movements formed around them from the French Revolution to the present. Included are liberalism, socialism, nationalism, fascism; and contemporary social movements, environmental and otherwise.
AUPOL 221 Canadian National Government and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Structure and function of the Government of Canada, especially the Crown, public service, House of Commons, Senate, and judiciary, in relation to political culture, regionalism, multiculturalism, gender and interest groups.
AUPOL 233 United States Government and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Institutions of the United States government with emphasis on the national level. The course covers the constitution, presidency, Congress, national bureaucracy, judiciary, and public policy-making. Prerequisite: AUPOL 103 or 104.
AUPOL 239 Cuban Government and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Survey of Cuban state institutions, political ideas, the Organs of Popular Power, the Communist Party of Cuba, and mass organizations. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 239 and AUSPA 252. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program.
AUPOL 240 Introduction to International Relations I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the key themes in the study of relations between states and other key actors engaged in world politics. Students will study the historical evolution of the international system; key theories of international relations; and major institutions such as the United Nations. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, consent of the Instructor.
AUPOL 248 Model United Nations/International Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation for and participation in a multiple- university, international Model United Nations Assembly or similar competition. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor, by application. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPOL 250 Introduction to Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theory and methods of the comparative study of political systems. The course focuses on institutional structures, political participation, political outcomes and contemporary political issues in a variety of countries in both the Global North and South. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 104 and AUPOL 250.
AUPOL 300 Third-Year Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students undertake research on a topic of their choice, leading to the production of a draft paper and an oral presentation. The course builds on the skills from AUPOL 200 and involves further instruction on research methods, building research proposals, conducting research projects, and approaches to the study of politics. Prerequisite: AUPOL 200.
AUPOL 310 Contemporary Political Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration into the prospects of democratic governance and political community through the reading of selected twentieth and twenty-first century writings. Prerequisites: AUPOL 210 or 211, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 310 and AUPHI 340.
AUPOL 312 Selected Topics in the History of Political Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of the texts of a particular theorist or of an issue central to the history of political thought. Topics vary from year to year. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 210, 211, consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 321 Provincial Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of provincial politics focused on Alberta, including comparisons to other Canadian provinces and addressing the relationship between the politics of these provinces and the institutions and ideas of federalism in Canada. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 324 Selected Topics in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of Canadian politics. Topics may vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: AUPOL 221.
AUPOL 325 Contemporary Issues in the Politics of Indigenous Peoples Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected themes related to the political life and organization of Indigenous peoples, primarily in Canada and set within the context of diverse nationhood, traditional conceptions of governance, the history of relationships with settler states, and global Indigenous movements and settings.
AUPOL 328 Environmental Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of contemporary debates in, and the evolution of, environmental policy and politics. This course will focus on Canadian issues in a comparative perspective, exploring topics such as environmental political theory, the policy cycle, social movements, international issues, and related case studies. Prerequisite: *3 credits in either Environmental Studies/ Science or Political Studies. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 328 and AUENV 328.
AUPOL 329 Politics and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Drawing on existing work in the areas of political culture, cultural studies and popular culture, this course explores the relationship and tension between politics and culture in western states, with a focus on Canada. Prerequisites: AUPOL 103 or 104.
AUPOL 341 The Global South and World Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Entry of the non-Western world into international relations, economic and political relations between “North” and “South,” and diplomacy in an age of tremendous inequality, cultural diversity, and pressing global problems such as the environment.
AUPOL 343 Selected Topics in International Political Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of international political economy. Topics may vary from year to year, depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 241, consent of the Instructor.
AUPOL 344 Selected Topics in International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics vary from year to year. The focus is on contemporary issues in world politics. Prerequisite: AUPOL 240 or consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 345 Canadian Foreign Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the debates concerning Canada’s place and foreign policy in the contemporary world. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 240, consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 346 United States Foreign Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). United States foreign policy in the postwar era of predominance in international relations, viewed through a range of theoretical perspectives. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 240, consent of the Instructor.
AUPOL 348 Model United Nations/International Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation for and participation in a multiple- university, international Model United Nations Assembly or similar competition. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor, by application. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUPOL 349 Ethics in World Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of ethical questions that emerge out of political practice at a time when ideas of global governance, economy, and culture are increasingly commonplace. Subjects may include war, genocide and humanitarian intervention, human rights, refugees, reconciliation in post-conflict societies, the distribution of wealth, citizenship and moral responsibility; and the historic tension between statist-nationalist, cosmopolitan, and other expressions of identity and ethical orientation. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 240, senior standing in a related discipline, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 349, 449.
AUPOL 350 Comparative European Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative analysis of selected issues in western European politics, focusing on Britain, Germany, and other countries. Prerequisite: AUPOL 103 or 104.
AUPOL 353 Law, Politics, and the Judicial Process Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the Canadian judicial branch of government in comparative perspective. The course probes court structures; judicial independence, appointment, discipline, and removal; judicial decision making processes; and courts and the public policy process. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, 221, AUCRI 160, AUIDS 160. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 353 and AUCRI 353.
AUPOL 355 Gender and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of the social and political construction of gender and the impact of gender on politics through an examination of gender with regards to one or more of the following areas: representation, social policy, feminist political thought, international relations, development, and/or globalization. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104, AUIDS 230.
AUPOL 356 China Tour: Experiencing Development and Change Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). A three week study trip to China, including travel to educational institutions in Zhuhai, the Zhuhai Special Economic Zone and other locations depending on the year. Through lectures, tours and research taking place in China, this course explores the effects of economic and institutional reforms as well as those of globalization, with links to China’s history and to its culture. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUECO 356 and AUPOL 356.
AUPOL 357 Selected Topics in Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of comparative politics. Topics may vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 103, 104.
AUPOL 358 Economic Development and Institutional Change in China Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A survey of China’s growth and economic development in the pre reform and post reform periods, exploring ideology, institutional structures, and state planning, and analyzing the impact of globalization on China’s business and political practices. Prerequisite: AUECO 101 and one of AUPOL 103 or AUPOL 104; or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit maybe obtained for only one of AUECO 354 and AUPOL 358.
AUPOL 399 Political Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Students have the opportunity to combine work experience with academic study through the development and completion of an internship program related to politics. As part of the internship, students are required to complete a major research paper related to their work. Prerequisites: Third-year standing in a Political Studies major and consent of the instructor. Notes: Students must develop an internship program and have it approved by a supervisor. Normally, students must also have a GPA of 3.5 or better in Political Studies to be eligible for this course.
AUPOL 400 Research Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). A research and reflection intensive course for students to conduct and finalize an in-depth independent project within a seminar setting. Instruction may also involve questions regarding methodology, theory, political action and the presuppositions of researchers. Prerequisite: AUPOL 300. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUGDS 400 and AUPOL 400.
AUPOL 401 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of political studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies.
AUPOL 402 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of political studies as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUPOL 401 and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies.
AUPOL 411 International Relations Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical survey of the principal contemporary theoretical approaches to the study of international politics. Prerequisite: AUPOL 240.
AUPOL 412 Selected Topics in the History of Political Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of the texts of a particular theorist or of an issue central to the history of political thought. Topics vary from year to year. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 210, 211, consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 424 Selected Topics in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of Canadian politics. Topics may vary from year to year, depending on instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: AUPOL 221.
AUPOL 443 Selected Topics in International Political Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced study of a particular dimension of international political economy. Topics may vary from year to year, depending on the instructor and student interest. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 241, consent of the Instructor.
AUPOL 444 Selected Topics in International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics vary from year to year. The focus is on contemporary issues in world politics. Prerequisite: AUPOL 240 or consent of the instructor.
AUPOL 449 Ethics in World Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of ethical questions that emerge out of political practice at a time when ideas of global governance, economy, and culture are increasingly commonplace. Subjects may include war, genocide and humanitarian intervention, human rights, refugees, reconciliation in post-conflict societies, the distribution of wealth, citizenship and moral responsibility; and the historic tension between statist-nationalist, cosmopolitan, and other expressions of identity and ethical orientation. Prerequisite: One of AUPOL 240, senior standing in a related discipline, consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPOL 349, 449.
AUPOL 453 Women and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores historical and contemporary relationships between women and the Canadian legal system. The course uses feminist legal theory to explore the evolution of areas of Canadian law of particular interest to women (for example: reproduction, abortion, family law, rape laws, criminal law) and political activism around the law and women’s issues. Prerequisites: One of AUCRI 353, AUPOL 353, 355 or AUIDS 230. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUCRI 453 and AUPOL 453.
AUPOL 455 Ethnicity and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Exploration of the social and political construction of ethnicity and race through the lens of one or more aspects of ethnic politics, such as nationalism, immigration, multinational states, diasporas, and/or genocide. Prerequisites: One of AUPOL 103, 104; minimum third year standing.
AUPOL 494 Political Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of psychological theory and research applied to the political realm. Topics covered may include psychological methods applied to political thought/action, political attitudes, political values and orientations, voter behaviour, effects of political campaigning, intergroup relations, motivating collective political movements, and the psychology of terrorism. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103; third year standing; One of AUPSY 240 or AUPSY 220 is highly recommended. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 448 and AUPOL 494.
#
Augustana Faculty - Psychology
AUPSY
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUPSY 103 Introduction to Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course focuses on the basic principles underlying human behaviour. Topics include the central nervous system, cognition, development, social, and personality, and mental health. AUPSY 103 is classified as a science course.
AUPSY 207 Psychology Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Psychology. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Psychology degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Psychology that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Students are encouraged to take this course in their second year of studies.
AUPSY 213 Statistical Methods for Psychological Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Application of statistical methods to psychological problems. Various experimental and non-experimental methods will be introduced. Topics include the scientific method, quantitative research designs, sampling and measuring techniques, biases in experimentation and ethical issues, measures of central tendency and variability, and tests of statistical hypothesis. Students will become familiar with the American Psychological Association (APA) standards of research and writing. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 213, AUSTA 153, 213, 215.
AUPSY 220 Personality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory survey including representative theoretical points of view and research relevant to the major problems of the study of personality. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 240 Social Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of theories and research on the individual in a social context. Topics may include self presentation, values/attitudes/beliefs, leadership, group dynamics, interpersonal attraction, and aggression. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 256 Developmental Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biological, cognitive, and social aspects of psychological development, with special emphasis on infancy, childhood, and adolescence. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 263 Memory and Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of mental processes in memory and cognition. Topics include short- and long-term memory phenomenon, visual attention, consciousness, problem solving and decision making. Prerequisite: AUPSY 101 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 267 Sensory Processes and Perception Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theoretical and experimental issues associated with sensory processes and perceptual experience. Prerequisite: AUPSY 101 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 275 An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structure and function of the nervous system, with a special emphasis on the brain. Prerequisite: AUPSY 101 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 301 Psycholinguistics Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in the psychology of language. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Prerequisites: AUPSY 263 and third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Psychology.
AUPSY 302 Developmental Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in developmental psychology. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Prerequisites: AUPSY 256 and third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Psychology.
AUPSY 303 Sleep, Emotion, and Stress: Physiological Psychology Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in physiological psychology. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Prerequisites: AUPSY 275 and third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Psychology.
AUPSY 304 Personality Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in personality psychology. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Topics include qualitative methods, cross- situational consistency, and the relationship between personality and psychotherapy. Prerequisites: AUPSY 220; third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Psychology.
AUPSY 307 Cognitive Psychology Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in cognitive psychology. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Prerequisites: AUPSY 263 and third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major in Psychology.
AUPSY 308 Social Psychology Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed examination of issues in social/personality psychology. The course adopts a seminar style that focuses on discussion, oral presentation, and writing skills. Topics will survey issues in the areas of social research methodology, attitudes, close relationships, and interpersonal and group processes. Prerequisites: AUPSY 240; third-year standing. Note: Open only to a student with a major or minor in Psychology.
AUPSY 313 Advanced Research Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In this course, students will continue to build upon their existing knowledge of quantitative research design. Some topics include: The role of theory in psychological research, critical thinking, advanced topics in quantitative design, including the analysis of variance. Prerequisites: AUPSY 213.
AUPSY 331 Psychological Assessment: Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and use of test data in counselling children and adults. Topics include the theory, administration and interpretation of selected tests associated with self-exploration (e.g., personality, psychopathology), intelligence and decision-making (e.g., career choices). Emphasis is placed on the selection and ethical use of tests. Prerequisite: AUPSY 213.
AUPSY 338 Intimate Relationships and Human Sexuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of research on intimate relationships and human sexuality from individual and interpersonal perspectives. Topics covered may include methods of sexuality/relationship science, attraction, gender identity, sex roles, sexual orientation, sexual attitudes and behavior, and relationship stresses. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240; third-year standing.
AUPSY 342 Health Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of theory, research and practice of health psychology and behavioural medicine. Prerequisite: AUPSY 220 or 240.
AUPSY 344 Environmental Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Systematic study of the dynamic interchange between people and their social and physical environmental contexts. Topics include theories of environmental perception, the effects of crowding, the impact of natural/urban settings, the effects of building design and colours, and managing limited resources. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103; third-year standing. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENV 344 and AUPSY 344.
AUPSY 346 Community Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the theories, approaches, and values behind social intervention intended to ameliorate, or prevent, psychological difficulty. Examples of community change are drawn from a Canadian context whenever possible. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103.
AUPSY 348 Industrial and Organizational Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of theories and research relevant to understanding human behaviour in the workplace. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240.
AUPSY 361 Cognitive Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the development of memory, perception, conceptual thought, and academic skills from birth through the school years. Prerequisite: AUPSY 263. Notes: AUPSY 361 is classified as a science course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 361 or AUPSY 362.
AUPSY 362 Cognitive Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the development of memory, perception, conceptual thought, and academic skills from birth through the school years. Prerequisite: AUPSY 256. Notes: AUPSY 362 is classified as an arts course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 361 or AUPSY 362.
AUPSY 363 Social Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of human cognition in an applied, social context. Topics covered include social judgment, decision-making, person/ group perception, autobiographical memory, motivated cognition, and emotion. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240 or 263.
AUPSY 369 Principles of Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of classical and operant conditioning. Prerequisites: AUPSY 101 (2016) or 103, and *3 at a senior level in Psychology.
AUPSY 373 Psychology of Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the production and perception of spoken, signed, and written language. Topics include speech perception, speech production, reading, language acquisition, and language origins. Prerequisite: AUPSY 263.
AUPSY 377 Human Neuropsychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of changes in mood, motivation, perception, attention, memory, and cognition, as revealed by structural alterations in the human brain. Prerequisite: AUPSY 275 or consent of the instructor.
AUPSY 391 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of psychology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUPSY 391 is classified as a science course; AUPSY 392 is classified as an arts course.
AUPSY 392 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of psychology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUPSY 391 is classified as a science course; AUPSY 392 is classified as an arts course.
AUPSY 393 Research Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Collection and analysis of data as part of faculty-led research in a peer-based context. Prerequisite: AUPSY 213 and consent of the instructor.
AUPSY 404 Selected Topics in Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Content of each course in this series varies from year to year, but in general it entails either a specific topic of prominent interest in psychology, or a review and discussion of a novel or emerging research area in contemporary psychology. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103. Note: AUPSY 404 is classified as an arts course.
AUPSY 406 Selected Topics in Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Content of each course in this series varies from year to year, but in general it entails either a specific topic of prominent interest in psychology, or a review and discussion of a novel or emerging research area in contemporary psychology. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103. Note: AUPSY 406 is classified as an arts course.
AUPSY 408 History and Systems of Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of major theoretical approaches to psychology, especially in the last two centuries, emphasizing the historical antecedents and contemporary significance of each. Prerequisites: AUPSY 101 (2016), 102 (2016), or 103, and fourth year standing. Notes: Open only to a student with a major in Psychology. AUPSY 408 is classified as an arts course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 408 or AUPSY 409.
AUPSY 409 History and Systems of Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of major theoretical approaches to psychology, especially in the last two centuries, emphasizing the historical antecedents and contemporary significance of each. Prerequisites: AUPSY 101 (2016), 102 (2016), or 103, and fourth year standing. Notes: Open only to a student with a major in Psychology. AUPSY 409 is classified as a science course. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 408 or AUPSY 409.
AUPSY 414 Program Evaluation in Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to program evaluation in psychology. Topics include: goals of program evaluation, evaluation strategies, evaluation methods and designs, using logic models for program evaluation, and case studies in program evaluation. Prerequisites: AUPSY 213.
AUPSY 426 Psychology of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth examination of psychological theories and research examining religious thought and behaviour. Topics may include spirituality, religious fundamentalism, religiosity, guilt, forgiveness, morality, mysticism, religious coping and health, conversion, religious socialization, ritual. Prerequisites: One of AUPSY 220, 240; third year standing.
AUPSY 441 Emotion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of theory and research on affect and emotion science. Topics covered may include the history of emotion research, measurement and classification of specific emotions, neurobiology of emotions, cognitive and cultural influences, consequences of emotions/moods, and disorders of emotion. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240 or 275; third year standing.
AUPSY 442 Psychology in a Cultural Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of cultural differences in psychological processes such as perception, memory, motivation, emotion, values, language, interpersonal relationships and the implications of these differences for cultural interactions. Prerequisites: One of AUPSY 220, 240; third year standing.
AUPSY 448 Political Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of psychological theory and research applied to the political realm. Topics covered may include psychological methods applied to political thought/action, political attitudes, political values and orientations, voter behavior, effects of political campaigning, intergroup relations, motivating collective political movements, and the psychology of terrorism. Prerequisite: AUPSY 102 (2016) or 103; third year standing; one of AUPSY 240 or AUPSY 220 is highly recommended. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 448 and AUPOL 494.
AUPSY 471 Language Acquisition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth look at the language acquisition process from birth through the preschool years. The stages of language development are discussed, as well as theoretical issues such as the role of the environment versus genetic predisposition. Prerequisite: AUPSY 373.
AUPSY 477 The Neurobiology of Learning, Memory, and Addiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of the neural mechanisms that underlie learning, memory, and addiction. Prerequisite: AUPSY 275.
AUPSY 483 Psychological Disorders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced-level course that focuses on the research related to the etiology, classification, assessment, and treatment of a variety of psychological disorders in children and adults (e.g., anxiety, addictions, depression, schizophrenia, and personality disorders). A student becomes acquainted with the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). Prerequisite: AUPSY 275. AUPSY 486 is highly recommended.
AUPSY 486 Clinical and Counselling Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the major approaches to counselling, providing the foundation for the counselling process. The student is involved in a variety of experiences in order to understand the basic concepts of each approach. Issues within the counselling profession such as ethical behaviour and career opportunities are also covered. Prerequisites: AUPSY 220 or 256; *3 in 300 level Psychology. AUPSY 331 or AUPSY 346 is highly recommended.
AUPSY 488 Forensic Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the psychology of criminal behaviour and the legal system. Topics include theories of criminal behaviour, jury selection and decision-making, police interrogations and confessions, eyewitness testimony, and risk assessment and offender intervention programs. Prerequisite: AUPSY 240. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPSY 488 and AUCRI 488.
AUPSY 491 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of psychology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUPSY 491 is classified as a science course.
AUPSY 492 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of psychology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. AUPSY 492 is classified as an arts course.
AUPSY 497 Individual Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature review and proposal (including an oral report) for fourth-year thesis. Prerequisites: AUPSY 313, fourth-year standing, and consent of the Instructor. Notes: Admission to AUPSY 497 normally requires a grade point average of at least 3.5. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in Psychology. AUPSY 497 is to be followed by AUPSY 499.
AUPSY 499 Individual Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fourth-year thesis research, report, and oral presentation. Prerequisite: AUPSY 497. Note: Admission to AUPSY 499 normally requires a grade point average of at least 3.5. An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Religion
AUREL
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUREL 100 Exploring Religious Meaning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of religious meaning through the examination of selected themes from Christian theology and from other religions. The themes include ways of conceiving of the divine, the problem of evil, the human predicament, the relationship of religion and society, and ideas of salvation.
AUREL 202 Women’s Writing and Feminist Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist theological approaches will be used to analyze religious and devotional writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Texts in the areas of scripture, systematic theology, ethics, and feminist theory and spirituality will be analyzed to understand the importance of feminist theological practice in dialogue with the Judeo-Christian tradition and women’s struggles for justice and well-being. Literary texts will include fiction, poetry, essays and personal narrative by authors such as Toni Morrison, Louise Erdrich, Alice Sebold, Emily Dickinson, Adrienne Rich, and Louise Glück. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 202, 302, AUREL 202, 302.
AUREL 207 Jesus of Nazareth in Biblical Scholarship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to religious studies through the interpretation of texts relating to one central figure, Jesus of Nazareth. The course focuses primarily on the Biblical texts about Jesus but also includes other relevant texts from a variety of times and traditions. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 207 and 208.
AUREL 208 Jesus of Nazareth in Contemporary Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to religious studies through an examination of contemporary theological interpretations of one central figure, Jesus of Nazareth. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 208 and 207.
AUREL 212 Introduction to the Hebrew Bible in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history and theology of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament).
AUREL 216 The Hebrew Prophets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Attempt to interpret selected prophets within their historical context. The course explores the relevance of the prophetic mode of analyzing contemporary society.
AUREL 221 Johannine Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the distinctive characteristics in structure and content of John’s Gospel and letters and the book of Revelation. The course concludes with a comparison of this literature with the rest of the New Testament writings.
AUREL 222 Introduction to the New Testament Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history and theology of the New Testament.
AUREL 223 Synoptic Gospels Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative and historical analysis of the purpose, characteristics, and problems of the first three Gospels.
AUREL 226 Pauline Epistles Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical literary, historical, and theological study of the Pauline writings.
AUREL 228 Religious Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Religious Studies. Prerequisite: Second year standing in Philosophy and Religion degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Religion that requires library research. Note: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 228, AUART 228, AUHIS 285, AUPHI 228.
AUREL 235 The Reformation Era Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of the Reformation from the advocates of reform in the fourteenth century through the Counter- Reformation up to the compilation of the Book of Concord in 1580 with special emphasis on the basic religious questions of that time. The lives and writings of the chief reformers are examined in their historical and cultural contexts, and relationships to common twentieth-century issues are emphasized.
AUREL 241 Basic Themes in Christian Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the basic themes of Christianity. Attention is given to the expression of these themes in the Bible, creedal statements, and contemporary theological literature.
AUREL 247 Theology of Luther Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical study of the genesis, development, and structure of Luther’s theology.
AUREL 252 Christian Understanding of Human Nature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the place of human nature in Western thought since the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, showing the relationship between the development of various non-Christian views and the responses of religious thinkers, primarily Christians. Emphasis is placed on the twentieth century.
AUREL 257 Modern Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary problems in religious ethics and their impact on individual and collective decision-making in the areas of personal and social issues.
AUREL 259 Bioethics, Suffering and the Soul Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course surveys the varied approaches to healing and experiences of sickness in modern life. It does so by investigating health, healing, and religion philosophically (in the way we think about ourselves), culturally (in the way we live), and existentially (in the way we experience our lives). Much of our discussion focuses on medicine, identity, and ethics primarily because a central factor that orients discussions about each is suffering. How we relieve, come to terms with, and act out our suffering have become the predominant features of modern life in western culture. Specific themes covered are the interconnections among dependence, suffering and identity; and the significance of religion for therapy and palliative care.
AUREL 260 India Tour Orientation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Examination of the intersection between religion and development in India. Students research and present on a particular topic relevant to the intersection of religion and development, as well as participate in team building exercises. Issues such as health and safety, travel preparations, dealing with culture shock, and the regional geography of India will be covered. Prerequisite: One of AUREL 100, 283, AUECO 101, consent of the Instructor. Notes: This is a prerequisite course for the India Tour (AUREL 266 or AUECO 254). Costs associated with the India Tour (3-weeks) and applicable tuition are the responsibility of the student. Enrolment is limited to 15 students. This course can only be taken by students who also register in AUREL 266 or AUECO 254. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 260 or AUECO 252.
AUREL 262 Spiritual Awareness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the nature and function of religious language that leads to spiritual awareness. Confrontation of two problems in relation to religious language: how to relate the infinite to the finite, and how to relate and discover one’s subjective inwardness. Attention is focused on various views regarding the nature of humanity and the human spirit. Special attention is given to the nature and function of parables.
AUREL 263 Spirituality and Globalization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical investigation of the values and views of human nature implicit in the discourse of corporate globalization and of those within the alternative visions of Jesus and the Hebrew prophets.
AUREL 266 India Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). Three-week study tour of India that focuses on a chosen region of India in order to examine the intersection between religious belief and practice and development challenges. Students will be exposed to various development projects as well as an array of religious sites. It is expected that students will gain an in depth understanding of India, its cultural and religious diversity, and the challenges it faces in the 21st century. Students will be exposed to both rural and urban life. Prerequisite: AUREL 260 or AUECO 252. Notes: Costs associated with this India Tour course and applicable tuition are the responsibility of the students. Enrolment is limited to 15 students. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 266 and AUECO 254. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUREL 270 Selected topics in Religion and Public Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of several current issues of the intersection of religion and public life and of how various religious traditions engage them.
AUREL 271 Selected Topics in Religion and Public Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of several current issues of the intersection of religion and public life and of how various religious traditions engage them.
AUREL 272 Selected Topics in Religion and Public Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of several current issues of the intersection of religion and public life and of how various religious traditions engage them.
AUREL 282 Major Religious Traditions: Middle East Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major religious traditions originating in the Middle East: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
AUREL 283 Major Religious Traditions: South Asia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major religious traditions of India, China, and Japan: Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism.
AUREL 290 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Religion. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest.
AUREL 291 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected topics in Religion. Topics may vary from year to year depending on the instructor and student interest.
AUREL 302 Women’s Writing and Feminist Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Several contemporary feminist theological approaches will be used to analyze religious and devotional writings by women from various historical periods and areas of the English-speaking world. Texts in the areas of scripture, systematic theology, ethics, and feminist theory and spirituality will be analyzed to understand the importance of feminist theological practice in dialogue with the Judeo-Christian tradition and women’s struggles for justice and wellbeing. Literary texts will include fiction, poetry, essays and personal narrative by authors such as Toni Morrison, Louise Erdrich, Alice Sebold, Emily Dickinson, Adrienne Rich, and Louise Glück. Prerequisites: Two of AUENG 102, 103, or 104, and *6 in English at the 200-level (excluding AUENG 204, 215, 291). Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUENG 202, 302, AUREL 202, 302.
AUREL 321 Johannine Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the distinctive characteristics in structure and content of John’s Gospel and letters and the book of Revelation. The course concludes with a comparison of this literature with the rest of the New Testament writings.
AUREL 335 The Reformation Era Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of the Reformation from the advocates of reform in the fourteenth century through the Counterr Reformation up to the compilation of the Book of Concord in 1580 with special emphasis on the basic religious questions of that time. The lives and writings of the chief reformers are examined in their historical and cultural contexts, and relationships to common twentieth-century issues are emphasized.
AUREL 345 Religion and Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the complexities and tensions in formulating religious responses to environmental problems. It looks at how eco justice, stewardship, ecological spirituality, and ecofeminism integrate Christian traditions with environmental responsibility. It also devotes substantial time to outlining the ways place-based identities address issues related to colonialism, environmental racism, technology and community. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUREL 345 and AUENV 345.
AUREL 347 Theology of Luther Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical study of the genesis, development, and structure of Luther’s theology.
AUREL 348 Justice Theologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of modern theologies that focus on the Biblical call for justice and offer a critique of Christianity’s alignment with modern culture. These theologies of revitalization and dissent seek to change modern Christendom from within. Among those discussed are liberation, political, ecological, and feminist theologies.
AUREL 349 Contemporary Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Brief survey of major trends in twentieth-century theology followed by a more in-depth study of one or two major theologians or “schools” of theology.
AUREL 352 Christian Understanding of Human Nature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the place of human nature in Western thought since the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, showing the relationship between the development of various non-Christian views and the responses of religious thinkers, primarily Christians. Emphasis is placed on the twentieth century.
AUREL 384 Gods, Goddesses, and Gurus: An Introduction to Hinduism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the broad range of religious phenomena commonly referred to as “Hinduism,” especially as expressed in contemporary India. The course explores the ways Hindus think about and visualize the divine. It examines Hindu sacred texts and popular religious literature, images and stories of the major Hindu gods and goddesses, how the divine is embodied in Hindu holy men and women, and the importance of sacred geography as the basis for religious pilgrimage. It also explores the ways this religious complex is being used by various political movements within India as a vehicle for shaping national identity.
AUREL 391 Directed Reading in Religion I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 392 Directed Reading in Religion II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 393 Directed Reading in Religion III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 394 Directed Reading in Religion IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 395 Directed Reading in Religion V Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 396 Directed Reading in Religion VI Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Religion or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 397 Directed Reading in Religion VII Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Religion or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 398 Directed Reading in Religion VIII Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Religion or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 399 Directed Reading in Religion IX Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study in a specific area of religion as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Religion or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in each of these courses.
AUREL 400 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 401 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 402 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 403 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 404 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 405 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 406 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 407 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 408 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 409 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 411 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 412 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 413 Selected Topics in Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, periods, works, methodologies, theological genres, and religious themes. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUREL 432 Philosophy, Religion Public Life Research Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Preparation of a literature review, research proposal, and presentation of a public life issue that will be explored from philosophical perspectives. Research may be participatory, archival or community based. It may include a community service learning component. Classes provide supportive and critical analysis throughout the student’s work and research process. Prerequisite: Third or fourth-year standing. Notes: Only open to students with a major in Philosophy and Religion. This course can be taken only by a student who is also registered in AUREL 433. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 422 and AUREL 432.
AUREL 433 Philosophy, Religion Public Life Research Seminar II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Continuation of AUREL 432. This course involves implementing research, presentation of results, and a final writing project. Research may be participatory, archival or community based. Classes provide supportive and critical analysis throughout the student’s work and research process. Prerequisite: AUREL 432, third or fourth-year standing. Notes: Only open to students with a major in Philosophy and Religion. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUPHI 423 and AUREL 433.
#
Augustana Faculty - Scandinavian
AUSCA
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUSCA 101 Beginners’ Norwegian I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). AUSCA 101 and 102 are designed to develop ability in reading and writing Norwegian, with a strong emphasis on the development of comprehension and oral communication skills. During this process, the student participates in a wide variety of interactive activities and is also exposed to contemporary Norwegian culture. These two courses not only encourage the student to think critically about the principles of grammar as they relate to the Norwegian language, but also stimulate an in-depth understanding of the principles by which language functions in general. These two courses also lead the student through the steps of reflective learning as they consider and discuss language learning strategies.
AUSCA 102 Beginners’ Norwegian II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUSCA 101. Prerequisite: AUSCA 101.
AUSCA 141 Viking-Age Prose Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected family and historical sagas (Njal’s saga, Egil’s saga, Grettir’s saga, Laxdæla saga, the Vinland sagas, and others), and an introduction to Viking-age history. All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 142 Viking Age Mythology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of Viking Age / Old Norse mythology and heroic legends, focusing on readings in translation from the Poetic and Prose Eddas. The influence of Old Norse mythology on European and North American visual art, literature, popular culture, and music from the 19th century to the present is also examined.
AUSCA 151 Modern Norwegian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dramas of Ibsen and representative prose works (e.g. Hamsun, Undset). All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 152 Modern Danish and Swedish Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dramas of Strindberg and representative prose works (e.g., Andersen, Jacobsen, and Lagerkvist). All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 161 Scandinavian Folk Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the three major genres of Scandinavian folk literature: the fictional folk tale, the legend, and the ballad. Folk literature as a cultural mirror and the impact of folk literature on nineteenth- and twentieth- century Scandinavian literature are also explored. All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 201 Intermediate Norwegian I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Reading and study of selected texts in Norwegian literature and culture. Composition and conversation are emphasized. Prerequisite: AUSCA 102 or Consent of the Instructor.
AUSCA 202 Intermediate Norwegian II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUSCA 201. Prerequisite: AUSCA 201.
AUSCA 210 Scandinavian Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Scandinavian Studies. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Modern Languages degree program. Corequisite: Any senior course in Scandinavian Studies that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSCA 210, AUENG 204, AUDRA 228, AUFRE 210, AUGER 210.
AUSCA 221 Representations of Gender in Modern Scandinavian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An analysis of the representations of gender in selected works of Scandinavian literature in English translation from 1850 to the present, as well as the role that gender has played in Scandinavian literature in general. Feminist literary and gender theory will be employed to analyze the various texts.
AUSCA 231 Scandinavian Culture and Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Scandinavian life and achievement, past and present, with emphasis on social and cultural conditions against a geographical and historical background. All lectures and readings are in English. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSCA 231 and AUGEO 242.
AUSCA 234 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian languages studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 235 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian languages studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 237 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 239 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 241 Viking-Age Prose Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected family and historical sagas (Njal’s saga, Egil’s saga, Grettir’s saga, Laxdæla saga, the Vinland sagas, and others), and an introduction to Viking-age history. All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 251 Modern Norwegian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dramas of Ibsen and representative prose works (e.g. Hamsun, Undset). All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 252 Modern Danish and Swedish Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dramas of Strindberg and representative prose works (e.g., Andersen, Jacobsen, and Lagerkvist). All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 261 Scandinavian Folk Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the three major genres of Scandinavian folk literature: the fictional folk tale, the legend, and the ballad. Folk literature as a cultural mirror and the impact of folk literature on nineteenth- and twentieth- century Scandinavian literature are also explored. All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 271 Personal Narratives of the North Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of personal narratives from the Canadian North and northern Scandinavia, with a focus on texts linking these regions. Narratives written from a variety of perspectives are read, including those of aboriginal peoples, explorers, professionals, adventurers and families. Texts which explore gender roles and gender myths in the North are also examined. Autobiographical theory is employed to analyze the texts. All lectures and readings are in English.
AUSCA 334 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian languages studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 335 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian languages studies. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 337 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 339 Selected Topics in Scandinavian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics in Scandinavian literature. Focus and content of each course will vary from year to year.
AUSCA 371 Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Scandinavian Prose and Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scandinavian prose and drama from 1720 to the beginning of Expressionism, in the original languages. Special emphasis is placed on Holberg’s comedies, Ibsen’s social dramas, Bjørnson’s peasant novels, Realism, Naturalism, and Neo-Romanticism. Prerequisite: AUSCA 202 or Consent of the Instructor.
AUSCA 372 Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Scandinavian Poetry and Short Stories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scandinavian poetry and short prose forms from 1720 to the beginnings of Scandinavian poetry and short prose forms from 1720 to the beginnings of Expressionism, in the original languages. Special emphasis is placed on Det Norske Selskab, Carl M. Bellman, Norwegian National Romanticism, Andersen’s fairy tales, post-Romantic poetry in Sweden, and symbolist poetry in Denmark. Prerequisite: AUSCA 202 or Consent of the Instructor.
AUSCA 381 Modern Scandinavian Prose and Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scandinavian prose and drama from 1900 to the present in the original languages. Special emphasis is placed on Strindberg’s plays, and novels by Undset, Hoel, Sandemose, Vesaas, Martin A. Hansen, Sven Delblanc, and others. Prerequisite: AUSCA 202 or Consent of the Instructor.
AUSCA 382 Modern Scandinavian Poetry and Short Stories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scandinavian poetry, short stories, and essays from 1900 to the present in the original languages, including Arnulf Øverland, Rolf Jacobsen, Inger Hagerup, Otto Gelsted, Benny Andersen, Nels Ferlin, Edith Södergrän, and others. Prerequisite: AUSCA 202 or Consent of the Instructor.
AUSCA 401 Directed Study: Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of the Norwegian language. Prerequisite: AUSCA 202 or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUSCA 403 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Scandinavian literature as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: A 200-level Scandinavian literature course or Consent of the Instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUSCA 405 Directed Study: Area Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Scandinavian culture as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: AUSCA 231. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
#
Augustana Faculty - Sociology
AUSOC
Department of Social Sciences Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUSOC 101 Introducing Sociology: Principles and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to sociology focusing on understanding the relation between the individual and society using concepts like social control, class, role, self, reference group, ideology, and world view. Through the use of some popular films, specific attention is paid to understanding the way we (as particular individuals) are, in taken-for-granted ways, shaped by our membership in large and small groupings. The implications of this shaping for our ideas of freedom, individuality, and morality are debated and examined.
AUSOC 103 Introducing Sociology: Institutions and Insight Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to sociology focusing on the relation between social institutions and everyday life. Through an examination of institutions like law, family, education, politics, religion, and economy, the course develops an understanding of themes such as changes in family organization, the relation between delinquency and power, and the relation between religion and economy. Prerequisite: AUSOC 101 or 105.
AUSOC 105 Social Anthropology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Ethnographic materials from non-Western societies are utilized to examine culture, social structure, and social process. Particular attention is paid to everyday life within various types of societies and how sociological ways of knowing are enriched by an attentiveness to cross-cultural research.
AUSOC 200 Young Offenders and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integrative examination of theories of delinquency, the relationship of the young offender to Canadian criminal law, family, drug abuse, child abuse, and recent developments in community-based treatment programs. Prerequisites: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, AUIDS 160 or AUCRI 160, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 200 and AUCRI 200.
AUSOC 218 Sociology of Global and Development Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory exploration of the issues of global economic development, global wealth and poverty, and global inequality. Alternative theoretical perspectives are introduced. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 218, and AUIDS 121, 221.
AUSOC 222 Canadian Social Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to sociological perspectives on social problems. Various theoretical orientations are applied to contemporary Canadian social issues such as poverty, gender issues, aboriginal rights, human sexuality, and regionalism. Prerequisites: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, AUIDS 160 or AUCRI 160, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 222 and AUCRI 222.
AUSOC 224 Sociology of Deviant Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interactionist analysis of processes accompanying the definition of deviance, subculture formation, careers of involvement in deviant activities, and the formal and informal regulation of deviance. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 224 and AUCRI 224.
AUSOC 225 Criminology: A Canadian Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of sociological explanations of crime and criminality. The course focuses on criminality as defined under Canadian criminal law and the traditional legal systems of Canada’s aboriginal peoples. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 225 and AUCRI 225.
AUSOC 231 Sociological Studies and Information Literacy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Introduction to library research skills in the discipline of Sociology. Prerequisite: Second-year standing in a Sociology degree program. Corequisite: Any senior Sociology course that requires library research. Notes: The corequisite must be taken concurrently. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 231, AUCRI 260, AUPOL 201.
AUSOC 232 Theoretic Developments in Sociology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the origin and the development of classical sociological theory, with particular emphasis on Marx, Durkheim, and Weber. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105.
AUSOC 233 Theoretic Developments in Sociology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the contributions of modern and contemporary sociological theorists, particularly Weber, Parsons, Mead, and others. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103 or 105; and AUSOC 232.
AUSOC 236 Research Design and Qualitative Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the relation between the method of inquiry and the problem which inquiry addresses. It is designed to acquaint students with numerous approaches to social research, covering all phases of the research process including formulation of a research problem, design of instruments, collection of data and analysis of results. Particular attention is given to qualitative methods, including interviewing, observation, focus groups, and unobtrusive measures. Students will be expected to conduct original research assignments. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105.
AUSOC 262 Mass Communication and Contemporary Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). What kind of communication is mass communication, and in what ways in particular is this different from other forms of communication? What does it mean to live in an age of mass culture? The construction and character of mass society as one organizational and communicative possibility, using notions of postmodernism and post-industrialism. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Sociology or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 263 The Social Theory of Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Inquiry into the nature of the social, moral, and theoretic ground of human communities, taking as its starting point an examination of the sociological research on the urban/rural difference. Involved in this is an examination of the kinds of social theories that best help us understand the nature of community. For all of the above, Canada is the case study. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 267 Knowledge and Human Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nature and assessment of knowledge (e.g., values and belief systems manifest in art, science, technology) in the context of social systems; the connection between competing systems of knowledge and social change. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105.
AUSOC 271 The Family Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the Western family from ancient Hebrew to contemporary times. It involves the study of the development of the modern nuclear family organization and the controversy over its demise. The relation of the family to wider social structures and society is also considered. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 275 Sex, Gender, and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the relation between gender as a social institution and our experiences of sexual identity and gender. The way gender differences are constructed and sustained as part of the reality of everyday life is also examined. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105, consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 279 Women in Contemporary Cuba Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Sociological examination of the life of women in contemporary Cuba, focusing on the experience of women within families, workplaces, and education. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 279 and AUSPA 253. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in- Cuba Program.
AUSOC 283 Sociology of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of sociological approaches to religion. Religiously grounded moral claims are examined relative to the social functions of religion, religion in relation to other social institutions, and religious experience in everyday life. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 101, 103, 105.
AUSOC 301 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of sociology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 302 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of sociology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUSOC 301 or 401, and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 303 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology, 3rd year standing or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 304 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 305 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 306 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 307 Directed Research I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Original research project as developed by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 308 Directed Research II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Original research project as developed by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 327 Crimes of the Powerful Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Why is it that so much attention is paid to “street crime” while the crimes of the powerful go virtually unpunished and sometimes unnoticed? A comprehensive examination of the prevalence and impact of crime committed by the powerful, including white collar occupational crime, corporate crimes, and crimes committed by the state. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, 224, 225, 353, AUIDS 160, AUPOL 353, AUSOC 224, 225; and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 327, 427, AUCRI 327, 427.
AUSOC 339 Fieldwork Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of fieldwork as it pertains to a qualitative sociology. Topics include epistemology, participant observation, unstructured interviews, managing and interpreting data, and research ethics. Each student completes an original field research project. Prerequisite: AUSOC 236 or AUPOL 200 and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 341 Sociology of Food Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course places food into broader sociocultural context to better understand why we eat what we eat. Topics will include: patterns of food production, distribution and consumption; the role of rood in relation to embodiment, identities, culture, class, and gender; the socio-cultural and political- economic organization of local, national, and global food systems; the implication of the food system for health, urban-rural relations, ecological sustainability, and social justice; food as a site of power relations, contestation, and social movements. In sum, this course will offer a sociological perspective of the food system and of engagements for its social transformation. Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 358 Environmental Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and empirical examination of the connection between the natural environment and the social world. This involves inquiry into the sociological dimensions of some major contemporary environmental problems including air, water and soil pollution, decreased biodiversity, deforestation, climate change, and ozone depletion. Particular attention is paid to the social and political connections among issues of industrialization, development, globalization, inequality, gender, social change and environmental destruction. Prerequisites: One of AUSOC 101, 103 or 105, and *3 at a senior level in AUSOC or AUENV, and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 358, 458 and AUENV 358, 458.
AUSOC 367 Knowledge and Human Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nature and assessment of knowledge (e.g., values and belief systems manifest in art, science, technology) in the context of social systems; the connection between competing systems of knowledge and social change. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 371 Film and Contemporary Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1L-0). Critical examination of both film as sophisticated text and sociological theories of film and contemporary culture. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 372 Visual Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An inquiry into visual representation in and of society; this includes the social dimensions that encompass the making, interpretation, and use of visual images, especially photographs, in collective life and within contemporary sociological research. Prerequisites: AUSOC 101, *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 377 Contemporary Theories of Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of gender from the perspective of contemporary theories (in particular, feminist theories). The liberal, socialist, radical, and poststructuralist feminist perspectives on gender are addressed. As well, the course looks at gender from ethnomethodological and hermeneutic perspectives. Prerequisite: One of AUSOC 232, 233, 275, or any course listed in the Women’s Studies program; and 3rd year standing; or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 391 Social Change from Development to Globalization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of some of the global processes of social change, including theoretical perspectives of development and globalization, such as modernization theory, World Systems theory and sustainable development. Prerequisite: *3 at a senior level in Sociology, or one of AUSOC 101, 103 and 105 plus participation in an international program; and 3rd year standing; or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 393 Political Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Political process seen as social action. An examination of the sociological import of themes such as the forms of power (e.g., authority, force), political organization (e.g., democracy, totalitarianism, the nation state), and political processes (e.g., leadership, party formation, political recruitment). Prerequisites: *3 at a senior level in Sociology and 3rd year standing, or consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 401 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of sociology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 402 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of sociology as defined by the student and a supervising instructor. Prerequisites: AUSOC 301 or 401, and consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 403 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: Two of AUSOC 101, 103, 105; and consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 404 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: Two of AUSOC 101, 103, 105; and consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 405 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: Two of AUSOC 101, 103, 105; and consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 406 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected topics at an advanced level that allows for a focus that is both specific and deep. Prerequisites: Two of AUSOC 101, 103, 105; and consent of the instructor.
AUSOC 407 Directed Research I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Original research project as developed by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 408 Directed Research II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Original research project as developed by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Notes: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course. The course is intended primarily for a student planning to pursue graduate studies in sociology.
AUSOC 427 Crimes of the Powerful Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Why is it that so much attention is paid to “street crime” while the crimes of the powerful go virtually unpunished and sometimes unnoticed? A comprehensive examination of the prevalence and impact of crime committed by the powerful, including white collar occupational crime, corporate crimes, and crimes committed by the state. Prerequisite: One of AUCRI 160, 224, 225, 353, AUIDS 160, AUPOL 353, AUSOC 224, 225 and 3rd year standing; or consent of the instructor. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSOC 327, 427, AUCRI 327, 427.
AUSOC 437 Symbolic Interactionism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of the theoretic contributions that symbolic interactionism has made to sociological inquiry. Taking a review of the conceptual groundwork laid by the pragmatists as its point of departure, the course confronts the work of theorists such as C. H. Cooley, W. I. Thomas, G. H. Mead, and H. Blumer. Classic debates within this tradition are examined relative to more contemporary responses. Prerequisite: *6 at a senior level in Sociology.
AUSOC 439 Seminar in Contemporary Sociological Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues in contemporary theory. Central concepts and arguments proposed by a variety of theorists are examined. Topics covered vary by instructor. A student confronts primary texts. Prerequisite: *6 at a senior level in Sociology.
#
Augustana Faculty - Spanish
AUSPA
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUSPA 100 Introductory Spanish Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 2-0-0 12 weeks immersion). Introduction to the Spanish language designed to develop functional oral skills and a rudimentary reading and writing ability in Spanish through class instruction, seminars, and immersion experience, including living with Spanish speakers. Prerequisite: Consent of the Development Studies selection committee. Corequisites: One of AUGDS 122, 124, 222, 224, 322, 324; and one of AUGDS 123, 125, 223, 225, 323, 325. Notes: The course is not open to a student with prior university credit in or native knowledge of Spanish. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 100, 101, 102, 103, 104.
AUSPA 101 Beginners’ Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Introduction to the essentials of the Spanish language designed to develop ability in speaking and writing, with a strong emphasis on the development of oral communication skills. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 100, 101 and 103.
AUSPA 102 Beginners’ Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUSPA 101. Prerequisite: AUSPA 101. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 100, 102 and 104.
AUSPA 103 Introductory Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Introduction to the Spanish language designed to develop functional oral skills and a rudimentary reading and writing ability in Spanish through class instruction, seminars, and immersion experience, including living with Spanish speakers. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 100, 101 and 103.
AUSPA 104 Introductory Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Continuation of introduction to the Spanish language designed to develop functional oral skills and a rudimentary reading and writing ability in Spanish through class instruction, seminars, and immersion experience, including living with Spanish speakers. Prerequisite: AUSPA 101 or 103. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 100, 102 and 104.
AUSPA 200 Intermediate Spanish Communication Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0 12 weeks immersion). Stress on oral communication through immersion, including living with native Spanish speakers. A continuation of speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills and understanding. Hispanic culture that was begun at the first year level of Spanish. Completion of the verb system. Prerequisite: Spanish 30 (or equivalent), AUSPA 100, 102, or 104. Corequisite: Immersion experience. Notes: Currently offered through the Puebla- Alberta Community Service Exchange, or “Mi casa es tu casa” with the Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Morelos. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 200, 201, 202, 203, 204.
AUSPA 201 Intermediate Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Designed to consolidate basic Spanish language skills through systematic grammar review and practice in various language skills. Prerequisite: Spanish 30 (or equivalent), AUSPA 100, 102 or 104. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 200, 201 and 203.
AUSPA 202 Intermediate Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Continuation of AUSPA 201. Prerequisite: AUSPA 201 or 203. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 200, 202 and 204.
AUSPA 203 Intermediate Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Stress on oral communication through immersion, including living with native Spanish speakers. A continuation of speaking, listening, reading and writing skills and understanding Hispanic culture that was begun at the first year level of Spanish. Completion of the verb system and introduction to translation and interpretation. Prerequisite: AUSPA 100, 102 or 104. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 200, 201, 203.
AUSPA 204 Intermediate Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A continuation of AUSPA 203. Stress on oral communication through immersion, including living with native Spanish speakers. A continuation of speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills and understanding Hispanic culture that was begun at the first year level of Spanish. Completion of the verb system and introduction to translation and interpretation. Prerequisite: AUSPA 201 or 203. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 200, 202, and 204.
AUSPA 230 Introduction to Modern and Contemporary Latin American Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works in English translation from representative authors such as Borges, Fuentes, and Garcia Márquez. Note: Credit can be obtained from only one of AUSPA 230 and AULIT 201.
AUSPA 231 Selected Topics in Modern and Contemporary Latin American Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected twentieth-century literary works in English translation from particular Latin American countries and regions. The country or region on which the course focuses varies from year to year. Note: Credit can be obtained from only one of AUSPA 231 and AULIT 202.
AUSPA 238 Selected Topics in Hispanic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUSPA 239 Selected Topics in Hispanic Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUSPA 240 Development Studies Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in a Latin American country. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 240, 340, AUGDS 122, 222, 322.
AUSPA 241 Development Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). By working in a Latin American country in projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing co-operatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of and integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 241, 341, AUGDS 123, 223, 323.
AUSPA 250 Integrated Studies (Cuba) Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This is a mandatory course for all students attending the Augustana-in-Cuba program. The course will integrate various disciplinary considerations with the student’s experiences while living and studying for a semester in Cuba. Themes will include: Cuban society and culture, Cuba in a Latin American context, Cuba and the world. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 250 and AUIDS 292. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program. Costs of the program beyond and including regular tuition are the responsibility of the student. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
AUSPA 251 Cuban History since 1895 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Study of Cuban history from the War of Independence (1895-1898) to the present. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 251 and AUHIS 291. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program.
AUSPA 252 Cuban Government and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Survey of Cuban state institutions, political ideas, the Organs of Popular Power, the Communist Party of Cuba, and mass organizations. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 252 and AUPOL 239. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in-Cuba Program.
AUSPA 253 Women in Contemporary Cuba Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Sociological examination of the life of women in contemporary Cuba, focusing on the experience of women within families, workplaces and education. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 253 and AUSOC 279. The course is available only as part of the Augustana-in- Cuba Program.
AUSPA 301 Advanced Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Designed as the normal sequel to AUSPA 200 or 202, the course is intended to strengthen and consolidate speaking, reading, and writing skills acquired in the aforementioned courses. Prerequisite: AUSPA 200, 202 or 204. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 301 and 303.
AUSPA 302 Advanced Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 8-0-0 in 6 weeks). Designed as the normal sequel to AUSPA 301, the course is intended to strengthen and consolidate speaking, reading, and writing skills acquired in the aforementioned course. Prerequisite: AUSPA 301 or 303. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 302 and 304.
AUSPA 303 Advanced Spanish I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing and reading skills acquired in Intermediate Spanish through classroom instruction, excursions and immersion experience, including living with native Spanish speakers. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of Hispanic culture and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUSPA 200, 202 or 204. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 301 and 303.
AUSPA 304 Advanced Spanish II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Continuation of AUSPA 303. Designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing and reading skills acquired in Intermediate Spanish through classroom instruction, excursions and immersion experience, including living with native Spanish speakers. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of Hispanic culture and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUSPA 301 or 303. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 302 and 304.
AUSPA 338 Selected Topics in Spanish Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUSPA 339 Selected Topics in Spanish Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced study of selected authors, works, periods, and critical approaches. Focus and content of each course are determined by student and faculty interests, and vary from year to year.
AUSPA 340 Development Studies Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). Integrative study of development issues and strategies based on work experiences in rural communities in a Latin American country. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 240, 340, AUGDS 122, 222, 322.
AUSPA 341 Development Studies Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). By working in a Latin American country in projects dealing with such issues as health care, water aid, sustainable farming, developing co-operatives, and education, the student becomes familiar with various aspects of and integrated approach to development. Prerequisite: Consent of the selection committee. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSPA 241, 341, AUGDS 123, 223, 323.
AUSPA 402 Directed Study: Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Spanish as defined by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *15 at a senior level in Spanish, including at least *3 at the 300 level, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUSPA 403 Directed Study: Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). Intensive study of a specific area of Spanish as defined by the student and supervising instructor. Prerequisites: *15 at a senior level in Spanish, including at least *3 at the 300 level, and consent of the instructor. Note: An “Application for Individual Study” must be completed and approved before registration in the course.
AUSPA 404 Advanced Spanish III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing and reading skills acquired in Advanced Spanish through classroom instruction, excursions and immersion experience, including living with native Spanish speakers. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of Hispanic culture and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUSPA 302 or AUSPA 304. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America.
AUSPA 405 Advanced Spanish IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Designed to develop further the comprehension, speaking, writing and reading skills acquired in Advanced Spanish through classroom instruction, excursions and immersion experience, including living with native Spanish speakers. Improvement in overall fluency, enhanced knowledge of Hispanic culture and review of key grammatical concepts are integral to the course. Prerequisite: AUSPA 402 or AUSPA 404. Corequisite: Participation in an Augustana Learning and Beyond offering in Spanish Latin America.
#
Augustana Faculty - Statistics
AUSTA
Department of Science Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AUSTA 153 Introductory Applied Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Introduction to elementary statistical concepts designed to provide an understanding of how statistics can be used to analyze real world phenomena. Emphasis is on applications in the field of business and economics. The student is required to use spreadsheet and other statistical software to analyze and examine statistical data. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2. Notes: Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSTA 153, 213, 215, AUPSY 213.
AUSTA 213 Statistical Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Frequency distributions, averages, dispersion, simple linear regression and correlation, elementary probability, binomial and normal distributions, sampling distributions, confidence intervals, significance tests on means and variances, chi square tests for two way tables,introduction to the analysis of variance. Labs include projects in which a student collects and analyzes real data. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2. Notes: The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Mathematics. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSTA 213, 153, 215, AUPSY 213.
AUSTA 215 Statistical Methods for the Natural Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Experimental design, data presentation and analysis; descriptive statistics, probability distributions and statistical hypothesis testing; parametric and non-parametric tests, correlation and regression; use of statistical software. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2; one of AUBIO 111, 112, AUCHE 110, AUCSC 110, AUENV 120, AUGEO 120, AUMAT 110, 111, 116, 120, AUPHY 102, 104, 110. Notes: The course does not count toward the major in Mathematics and Physics or the minor in Mathematics. Credit may be obtained for only one of AUSTA 153, 213, 215, AUPSY 213.
#
Augustana Faculty - World Literatures
AULIT
Department of Fine Arts Augustana Faculty
Undergraduate Courses
AULIT 201 Introduction to Modern and Contemporary Latin American Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works in English translation from representative authors such as Borges, Fuentes, and García Márquez. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AULIT 201 and AUSPA 230.
AULIT 202 Selected Topics in Modern and Contemporary Latin American Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected twentieth-century literary works, in English translation, from particular Latin American countries and regions. The country or region on which the course focuses varies from year to year. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of AULIT 202 and AUSPA 231.
#
Biochemistry
BIOCH
Department of Biochemistry Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
Notes
(1) BIOCH 200, 310, 320, 330, 401, 410, 420, 430, 441, 450, 455, 460 can be used by students in the Faculty of Science as science courses.
(2) Courses in clinical biochemistry are listed under Medical Laboratory Science.
BIOCH 200 Introductory Biochemistry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the fundamental principles of biochemistry. Protein structure and function; enzymes; lipids and the structure of biological membranes; nucleotides and the structure of nucleic acids; bioenergetics and the catabolism of carbohydrates. Prerequisites: CHEM 101 and CHEM 261 or 164, or SCI 100.
BIOCH 250 The Biochemical Foundations of Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This online course covers principles of biochemistry identified in the revised MCAT (2015) in the section “Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems.” The material is presented with a focus on clinical correlations and includes the following topics. 1) The structure and function of proteins and biological membranes focusing on enzymes, antibodies, structural proteins, membrane lipids, ion channels and transporter proteins, receptors, and the transduction of hormonal signals. 2) The integration of metabolism focusing on fuels and organ specialization, metabolism of glucose, fatty acids, cholesterol, and amino acids, and the hormonal regulation of energy metabolism. 3) DNA, RNA and the synthesis of proteins focusing on transcription and translation, mutations, the regulation of gene expression, and DNA damage and repair. CHEM 101, 102, 261 and 263, or equivalent, are recommended pre-requisites. Credit may not be obtained in both BIOCH 250 and BIOCH 200.
BIOCH 299 Research Opportunity Program Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biochemistry. Normally taken after completion of a minimum of *30 but not more than *60 in a program in the Faculty of Science. Prerequisite: GPA of 2.7 or higher, BIOCH 200, and consent of department. Normally taken in addition to a full course load. Note: Application does not guarantee a position. Credit may be obtained twice.
BIOCH 310 Bioenergetics and Metabolism =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to enable rigorous study of the molecular mechanisms in bioenergetics and metabolism. It covers: the principles of bioenergetics; the reactions and pathways of carbohydrate, lipid, and nitrogen metabolism, and their regulation; oxidative phosphorylation; the integration and hormonal regulation of mammalian metabolism. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200, CHEM 102 (or SCI 100) and CHEM 263 with a minimum GPA of 2.70 for these three courses. In the case of over-subscription, preference will be given to students enrolled in programs with a requirement for this course.
BIOCH 320 Structure and Catalysis =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to illustrate, in detail, the relationships between structure and function in biological molecules. It covers: the structure of proteins; experimental techniques used to study proteins; selected illustrations of protein function; enzyme catalysis, kinetics, and regulation; structural carbohydrates and glycobiology; the structure of lipids; biological membranes and mechanisms of transport. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200, CHEM 102 (or SCI 100) and CHEM 263 with a minimum GPA of 2.70 for these three courses. In the case of over-subscription, preference will be given to students enrolled in programs with a requirement for this course.
BIOCH 330 Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive introduction to the biochemistry of nucleic acids. It covers: the structure and properties of nucleotides and nucleic acids; DNA-based information technologies; genes and chromosome structure; molecular mechanisms in DNA replication, repair, and recombination; RNA metabolism; protein synthesis and targeting; the regulation of gene expression. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200, CHEM 102 (or SCI 100), and CHEM 263, with a minimum GPA of 2.70 for these three courses. In the case of over-subscription, preference will be given to students enrolled in programs with a requirement for this course.
BIOCH 398 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). Supervised research within a laboratory in the Department of Biochemistry. The results of the research project will be presented in a poster. This course is available only as a six week Spring or Summer session course. Prerequisites: Credit in at least one 300-level BIOCH course and consent of the Department. BIOCH 398 may not be taken for credit if credit has been obtained in BIOCH 498 or 499.
BIOCH 401 Biochemistry Laboratory =OPEN-LIMITED Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-8). Laboratory course in modern biochemical techniques. Designed for Biochemistry Honors and Specialization students in their third or fourth year. Other interested students may enrol subject to space limitations. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330 with a minimum grade of B-, and consent of Department.
BIOCH 402 Research Skills in Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). A laboratory course which introduces a range of the experimental techniques important in biochemical research. The course is hands-on with a focus on fundamental laboratory skills and practices. Designed for Biochemistry Honors and Specialization students in their second or third year and intended in preparation for undertaking a directed research project in biochemistry. Other interested students may enroll subject to space limitations. Pre or corequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330 and consent of the Department.
BIOCH 409 Biochemistry Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). Research and/or reading course. This course allows a student to study an area of biochemistry in much greater detail than is usual in most courses. The format is usually a reading/tutorial in which the student carries out directed reading and meets with the tutor at regular intervals for discussion and further guidance. Term papers or presentations may be used for evaluation purposes. A mature attitude towards learning is essential, as the course often requires independent study and research. Students who have a particular interest in any specific area of biochemistry are encouraged to meet with the faculty members to explore the possibilities of arranging a mutually satisfactory topic. Prerequisites: At least one of BIOCH 410, 420, 430, 441, 455, or 465. Available only to students in the Biochemistry Specialization or Honors programs. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
BIOCH 410 Signal Transduction =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of the biochemistry of cell communication and signal transduction through receptor activation, the generation of second messengers, and the control of protein modifications. The course will emphasize the mechanisms responsible for the regulation of cell migration, division and death. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310, 320 and 330, all with a minimum grade of B-, or consent of the Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 510).
BIOCH 420 Proteins: Structure, Function, and Regulation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of protein structure, function, and dynamics, with an introduction to force fields used in modern molecular dynamics. Focus topics include an introduction to intrinsically disordered proteins and their role in misfolding diseases, the structural biology, ligand binding, and mechanisms of membrane bound enzymes, and mechanisms underlying the regulation of protein function and enzymes involved in cell signaling. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320, with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 520).
BIOCH 425 Proteomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1/2). An advanced course focusing on the analysis of protein function and protein-protein interactions within the context of the entire protein complement of a cell. Some aspects of protein structure as it pertains to the principles of protein-protein interactions will be covered along with genetic and biochemical methods for the analysis of protein complexes, protein interaction networks and system wide protein identification and dynamics. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and BIOCH 330 with a minimum GPA of 3.0 in these courses.
BIOCH 430 Biochemistry of Eukaryotic Gene Expression =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The organization and expression at the molecular level of information encoded in the nucleic acids of eukaryotic cells. The focus will be on genome structure and the regulation of gene expression at the levels of transcription, post-transcriptional processing, translation, post-translational modification and protein sorting. Recombinant DNA technologies and genetic engineering will be discussed as methods for studying the cellular processing of genetic information. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330, both with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 530).
BIOCH 441 Structure and Function of Biological Membranes =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the structure and function of biological membranes. Topics include the structure, properties and composition of biomembranes, characterization and structural principles of membrane lipids and proteins, lateral and transverse asymmetry, dynamics, lipid-protein interactions, membrane enzymology, permeability, and biogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320, with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 541).
BIOCH 450 The Molecular Biology of Mammalian Viruses =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on virus structure, replication, and interaction with host cells at the molecular level. Lytic viruses with single- or double-stranded DNA or RNA genomes will be discussed, as will the mechanisms of viral oncogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330, with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 550).
BIOCH 455 Biochemistry of Lipids and Lipoproteins =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced course focusing on specific aspects of the regulation of lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. Topics include the transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms governing the synthesis and degradation of important enzymes, lipids, and lipid transport molecules; the role of lipid mediators in signaling pathways and protein modification; the assembly and dynamics of lipoproteins and biological membranes; genetic disruptions of lipid regulatory proteins such as cell surface receptors leading to human disease. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310 with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Graduate students may not register for credit (see BIOCH 555).
BIOCH 465 Methods in Molecular Biophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of biophysical methods used in the characterization and structural determination of biological macromolecules, from ensemble measurements to single-molecule detection. Topics include mass spectrometry, optical spectroscopy, light microscopy, X-ray and neutron diffraction, electron microscopy, molecular dynamics and nuclear magnetic resonance. Emphasis is on using techniques in evaluating structure-function relationships through the discussion of representative macromolecular systems. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 with a minimum grade of B- or consent of the Department. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 460.
BIOCH 481 Design and Construction of Synthetic Biological Systems I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course explores both the opportunities and challenges of synthetic life by providing a practical and theoretical introduction to this new discipline through lectures, class discussion, assigned reading and case studies. Topics covered include: natural vs artificial design of genetic circuits and devices, experimental aspects of gene and gene network construction, metabolic network design and evaluation, and the role of computer modeling in design creation, testing and optimization. The availability of BIOCH 481 to students from non-biochemistry backgrounds emphasizes the highly interdisciplinary nature of the field. Prerequisites: Registration in the Faculties of Science or Engineering and a minimum GPA 3.3 (or consent of the department).
BIOCH 482 Design and Construction of Synthetic Biological Systems II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-4). Designed to prepare students for participation in the iGEM Competition (International Genetically Engineered Machines) through team-based problem solving. Teams composed of individuals from different programs are expected to: 1) Identify a relevant problem within the realm of synthetic biology. 2) Devise a credible and detailed plan to solve an aspect of the problem. 3) Demonstrate the feasibility of the design by computer modeling. 4) Evaluate the costs of success in terms of the financial, human and technological resources that are needed for the timely completion of the project. 5) Develop a plan to acquire the resources that are required for a successful outcome. 6) Produce a report and presentation. Although students are expected to exhibit a high level of independence and creativity, they can count on considerable guidance and support from participating faculty. Prerequisites: BIOCH 481 (or consent of the department).
BIOCH 495 Special Topics in Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to advanced undergraduates in Biochemistry programs. Consult the Department for details about current offerings. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310, 320 and 330, and consent of the instructor. This course is restricted to students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
BIOCH 497 International Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). Supervised research within an international laboratory assigned by the Department of Biochemistry, to be carried out over one term (Spring or Summer). The results of the research project will be presented in an oral presentation. Can be taken as a science elective but not as a substitute for required courses in biochemistry. Can be taken for credit in addition to BIOCH 498 and BIOCH 499. Prerequisites: BIOCH 401 and consent of the Department.
BIOCH 498 Directed Research Project =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). Supervised research within a laboratory in the Department of Biochemistry, to be carried out over one term (Fall or Winter). The results of the research project will be presented in a short seminar. This course is intended for students in Honors or Specialization in Biochemistry. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. This course is not a substitute for required courses in Biochemistry. Can be taken for credit prior to BIOCH 499.
BIOCH 499 Directed Research Project =OPEN-LIMITED Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-8). Supervised research within a laboratory in the Department of Biochemistry, to be carried out over both terms of Fall/Winter. The results of the research project will be presented in a final written report and an oral presentation. This course is required for the Honors program, but can be taken as a science elective by students in the Specialization program. Students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability. Prerequisites: BIOCH 401 and consent of the Department.
Graduate Courses
BIOCH 510 Signal Transduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of the biochemistry of cell communication and signal transduction through receptor activation, the generation of second messengers, and the control of protein modifications. The course will emphasize the mechanisms responsible for the regulation of cell migration, division and death. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310, 320 and 330, or BIOCH 203 and 205, all with a minimum grade of B-, or consent of the Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 410, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 410.
BIOCH 520 Protein Chemistry, Structure, and Function Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Protein chemistry and purification. The intra- and intermolecular forces that determine protein structure. Principles of protein folding and dynamics. Enzyme mechanisms and ligand binding interactions. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320, or BIOCH 203 and 205, all with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 420, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 420.
BIOCH 525 Proteomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1/2). An advanced course focusing on the analysis of protein function and protein-protein interactions within the context of the entire protein complement of a cell. Some aspects of protein structure as it pertains to the principles of protein-protein interactions will be covered along with genetic and biochemical methods for the analysis of protein complexes, protein interaction networks and system wide protein identification and dynamics. This course is intended for students in Biochemistry but students in other programs may be admitted subject to availability and with the consent of the Department. Prerequisites: BIOCH 420 and BIOCH 430 or their equivalent with a minimum GPA of 3.2 in these courses.
BIOCH 530 Biochemistry of Eukaryotic Gene Expression Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The organization and expression at the molecular level of information encoded in the nucleic acids of eukaryotic cells. The focus will be on genome structure and the regulation of gene expression at the levels of transcription, post-transcriptional processing, translation, post-translational modification and protein sorting. Recombinant DNA technologies and genetic engineering will be discussed as methods for studying the cellular processing of genetic information. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330, or BIOCH 203 and 205, all with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 430, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 430.
BIOCH 541 Structure and Function of Biological Membranes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the structure and function of biological membranes. Topics include the structure, properties and composition of biomembranes, characterization and structural principles of membrane lipids and proteins, lateral and transverse asymmetry, dynamics, lipid-protein interactions, membrane enzymology, permeability, and biogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320, or BIOCH 203 and 205, all with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 441, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 441.
BIOCH 550 The Molecular Biology of Mammalian Viruses Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on virus structure, replication, and interaction with host cells at the molecular level. Lytic viruses with single- or double-stranded DNA or RNA genomes will be discussed, as will the mechanisms of viral oncogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOCH 320 and 330, or BIOCH 203 and 205, all with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 450, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 450.
BIOCH 555 Biochemistry of Lipids and Lipoproteins Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced course focusing on specific aspects of the regulation of lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. Topics include the transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms governing the synthesis and degradation of important enzymes, lipids, and lipid transport molecules; the role of lipid mediators in signaling pathways and protein modification; the assembly and dynamics of lipoproteins and biological membranes; genetic disruptions of lipid regulatory proteins such as cell surface receptors leading to human disease. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310 with a minimum grade of B- or consent of Department. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 455, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 455.
BIOCH 565 Methods in Molecular Biophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of biophysical methods used in the characterization and structural determination of biological macromolecules, from ensemble measurements to single-molecule detection. Topics include mass spectrometry, optical spectroscopy, light microscopy, X-ray and neutron diffraction, electron microscopy, molecular dynamics and nuclear magnetic resonance. Emphasis is on using techniques in evaluating structure-function relationships through the discussion of representative macromolecular systems. Lectures are the same as for BIOCH 465, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in BIOCH 460 or 465.
BIOCH 609 Macromolecular Structure Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles of X-ray crystallography as applied to the study of protein and nucleic acid structure. Practical aspects of diffraction and structure solution are demonstrated by a collaborative study of a suitable small molecule of biological interest. Designed for senior honors and graduate students. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Maximum enrolment of 10 students. Offered in alternate years.
BIOCH 620 Selected Topics in Protein Structure, Function, and Regulation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Directed reading and seminar course, based on papers taken from recent literature of protein research. Students critically discuss the papers and give oral presentations to the class. Designed for graduate students. Prerequisite: BIOCH 420 or equivalent, or consent of Department.
BIOCH 623 Special Topics in Research on Polynucleotides Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). This course is a journal club and discussion group in which current research topics on nucleic acids are discussed. Specific talks range from biochemistry, genetics and microbiology to nuclear biology and clinical aspects.
BIOCH 626 Special Topics in Protein Research Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). Seminar course for advanced students. Detailed consideration is given to recent advances in research on protein structure and function and mechanism of enzyme action. Prerequisite: BIOCH 420 or consent of Department.
BIOCH 630 Selected Topics in Modern Molecular Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Directed reading and seminar course, based on papers taken from the recent literature of molecular biology. Students critically discuss the papers and give oral presentations. Note: designed for graduate students; offered yearly. Prerequisite: BIOCH 530 and consent of the Department.
BIOCH 640 Special Topics in Research on Biomembranes Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). Seminar course for advanced students covering selected topics from the current literature in the field of membrane structure and function. Prerequisite: BIOCH 441 or consent of Department.
BIOCH 641 Selected Topics on the Structure and Function of Biological Membranes Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Directed reading and seminar course on the structure and function of biological membranes. Topics include membrane biogenesis, bioenergetics, transport and structural aspects of membrane lipids and proteins. Prerequisite: BIOCH 441 or consent of the Department.
BIOCH 650 Signal Transduction Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). A journal club and discussion group addressing topics in the general area of signalling mechanisms that control cell activation, growth, apoptosis and vesicle trafficking. Specific talks range from biochemistry, genetics and microbiology to molecular biology and clinical aspects. Prerequisite: BIOCH 410/510 or consent of Department.
BIOCH 651 Special Topics in Lipid and Lipoprotein Research Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). Seminar for advanced students covering selected topics from the current literature in the field of lipid and lipoprotein research. Prerequisite: BIOCH 555 or consent of Department.
BIOCH 655 Advances in Lipid and Lipoprotein Research Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 1-2s-0). Recent developments and use of the current literature are emphasized. Topics include regulation of lipid metabolism, intracellular lipid trafficking, regulation of lipoprotein secretion, lipid transfer among lipoproteins, reverse cholesterol transport, and atherosclerosis. Prerequisite: BIOCH 455, or 555, or consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
BIOCH 670 Recent Advances in Biochemistry Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 0-1s-0). A seminar course on topics of current interest in biochemistry. Students will contribute to a presentation based on recent developments published in first rate journals. Attendance at all seminars is expected. Note: open only to graduate students in Biochemistry.
BIOCH 671 Recent Advances in Biochemistry Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 0-1s-0). A seminar course on topics of current interest in biochemistry. Students will contribute a presentation on their research project that includes original data. Attendance at all seminars is expected. Prerequisite: BIOCH 670 or consent of the Department. Note: open only to graduate students in Biochemistry.
BIOCH 675 Magnetic Resonance in Biology and Medicine II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Designed for advanced honors and graduate students interested in the application of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to biological systems. Topics include quantum mechanical basis of NMR, multinuclear multidimensional NMR experiments, NMR relaxation theory, new NMR applications. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Offered in alternate years.
#
Bioinformatics
BIOIN
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
BIOIN 301 Bioinformatics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to computational tools and databases used in the collection and analysis of sequence data and other analytical data from high-throughput molecular biology studies. Students will use existing tools, and learn the underlying algorithms and their limitations. Prerequisite: any 200-level Biological Sciences course or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOIN 301 and BIOL 501.
BIOIN 401 Bioinformatics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Advanced topics in bioinformatics will be covered. A major part of the course will be devoted to team-based projects involving writing novel bioinformatics tools to deal with current problems in bioinformatics. Prerequisites: BIOIN 301, a 300-level CMPUT course and a 300-level GENET course. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Computing Science and Biological Sciences). [Biological Sciences].
#
Biology (Biological Sciences)
BIOL
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Botany (BOT); Entomology (ENT); Genetics (GENET); Microbiology (MICRB); Zoology (ZOOL).
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
BIOL 107 Introduction to Cell Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). An introduction to cell structure and function. Major topics include the molecules and structures that comprise prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the mechanisms by which energy is harvested and used by cells, how cells reproduce, and how information is stored and used within a cell via the processes of DNA replication, transcription, and translation. Prerequisites: Biology 30 and Chemistry 30. Note: BIOL 107 is not a prerequisite for BIOL 108. BIOL 107 and 108 can be taken in either term.
BIOL 108 Introduction to Biological Diversity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). Examines the major lineages of life on Earth. Overview of evolutionary principles and classification, the history of life, and the key adaptations of prokaryotes, protists, fungi, plants, and animals. Laboratories survey the diversity of biological form and function, and introduce students to data collection and scientific writing. Prerequisite: Biology 30. Note: BIOL 107 is not a prerequisite for BIOL 108. BIOL 107 and 108 can be taken in either term.
BIOL 201 Eukaryotic Cellular Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A structural and functional dissection of a eukaryotic cell. Detection of specific molecules at the ultrastructural level; plasma membrane structure and function; cytoskeleton involvement in intracellular transport, mitosis, and cytokinesis; the endomembrane system, protein targeting, exocytosis and endocytosis; nuclear structure and function; cell cycle control and cancer. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 and a 100-level Chemistry course, or SCI 100. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in CELL 201, in addition, not available to students currently enrolled in CELL 201.
BIOL 207 Molecular Genetics and Heredity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). The chromosomal and molecular basis for the transmission and function of genes. The construction of genetic and physical maps of genes and genomes. Strategies for the isolation of specific genes. Examples of regulatory mechanisms for the expression of the genetic material in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or SCI 100.
BIOL 208 Principles of Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Ecology is the scientific study of interactions between organisms and their environment in a hierarchy of levels of organization: individuals, populations, communities, and ecosystems. Provides a comprehensive survey of general concepts that can stand alone or serve as preparation for advanced courses in ecology. Labs emphasize collection, analysis, and interpretation of data from ecological experiments and field studies to illustrate and complement lecture material. Examples are drawn from a broad range of organisms and systems. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100. Open to students in the BSc Forestry and BSc Forest Business Management program once they have completed REN R 120 and REN R 205.
BIOL 221 Mechanisms of Evolution =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Discusses the major features of the evolutionary process, including the fossil record, basic population genetics, variation, natural selection, adaptation, and speciation. Prerequisites: BIOL 107, 108 or SCI 100. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 221 and 321.
BIOL 298 Understanding Biological Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the process of scientific research including the different approaches to research within biology, formulating research questions, hands-on skill development, experimental design, data collection and analysis, critical thinking, communication of findings, ethics, and career opportunities. Students will attend lectures and selected seminars, and participate in biological research under the supervision of an academic staff member in the Department of Biological Sciences. Open to undergraduate students in the Faculty of Science with preference given to students in Honors and Specialization Programs in the Department of Biological Sciences, and BSc General students (Biological Sciences major). Consent of Department of Biological Sciences required. All students must apply for admission. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or 108 or SCI 100. See the Biological Sciences website for more details at www.biology.ualberta.ca/courses.
BIOL 299 Research Opportunity Program =OPEN Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Normally taken in the second year. Recommended that students have a minimum of *30 but not more than *60 in a program in the Faculty of Science. Prerequisite: GPA of 2.5 or higher, credit in BIOL 107 or 108 or SCI 100 and/or consent of Department. Normally taken in addition to a full course load. Project and course information available at ROP website or Department of Biological Sciences. Note: Application does not guarantee an ROP position. Credit may be obtained twice.
BIOL 315 Biology: An Historical Perspective =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An outline of the scientific foundations of biological discovery. Students must have a sophisticated understanding of modern concepts in biology, be prepared to write a major essay on a focused topic, deliver an oral presentation and participate actively in class discussion. Prerequisite: a third-year course in the biological sciences or consent of instructor.
BIOL 322 Diversity and Evolution of Microbial Life =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The diversity of microscopic life forms, both prokaryotic (bacteria and archaea) and eukaryotic (protists, fungi, phytoplankton), will be explored. The evolutionary forces responsible for this diversity will be described in detail and contrasted to those at work in macroscopic eukaryotes. Students will learn about the molecular methods used to identify and classify both culturable and non-culturable microbes, and genetically characterize entire populations. Prerequisites: BIOL 107 and 108 or SCI 100, and a 200-level Biological Sciences course. MICRB 265 recommended.
BIOL 330 Introduction to Biological Data =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Expands on prior introductions to the scientific method and examines the steps involved in the planning, collection, organization, analysis and presentation of biological data. Classes will explore the types of data used to answer a variety of biological questions and will review several different sampling designs, assess the benefits and limitations of various data types for scientific inference, and integrate the statistical methods that are common to other introductory courses. Labs will teach students how spreadsheets and relational databases can be used to manipulate, analyze, and present the results of scientific research. Prerequisites: BIOL 208 and STAT 151 or SCI 151.
BIOL 331 Population Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Principles of population ecology as they apply to plants and animals; population consequences of variation among individuals; habitat structure and population structure; habitat selection and foraging theory; life tables, demography, and the evolution of life history patterns; population dynamics; interactions among organisms (predation, competition, mutualism); and population regulation. Prerequisites: BIOL 208; any one of MATH 113, 115, 120, 125 or SCI 100; STAT 151 or SCI 151.
BIOL 332 Community Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-0). Principles of community ecology, applied to plants and animals. The nature of communities, functional groups and rarity; niche theory and competition; disturbance and other alternatives to competition; food webs (predation, herbivory and disease); diversity (determinants, functional consequences and gradients); island communities. Prerequisites: BIOL 208; STAT 151 or SCI 151; and any one of MATH 113, 115, 120, 125 or SCI 100. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in ZOOL 332.
BIOL 333 Wetland Science and Management =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). The course includes an introduction to the hydrology, biogeochemistry and ecology of wetland ecosystems. Topics covered include classification, geomorphic setting, distribution, functions and ecosystem services of wetlands. Human use, alteration and management of wetlands are examined. An emphasis is placed on wetlands and wetland management in Western Canada, including boreal peatlands and prairie marshes. A full day field trip on a Saturday is required. Prerequisite: one of BIOL 208, REN R 250, or EAS 201.
BIOL 335 Principles of Systematics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). An introduction to the principles, methods, and applications of biological systematics, including reconstruction of phylogenies, creation of classifications, historical biogeography, and applications in evolutionary biology. Each student will analyze phylogenetic data and write a description of a species and its relationships. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100 and a 200-level Biological Sciences course; BIOL 321 strongly recommended.
BIOL 340 Global Biogeochemistry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to biogeochemical cycles in the environment. Discusses processes and reactions governing cycles in the atmosphere, lithosphere, terrestrial ecosystems, freshwater wetlands and lakes, river estuaries, and the oceans. Outlines the global cycles of water, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. Group discussions will incorporate current topics in anthropogenic alterations of natural cycles that lead to ecosystem degradation. Prerequisites: CHEM 101 or SCI 100 and BIOL 208; MICRB 265 strongly recommended.
BIOL 341 Ecotoxicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the adverse effects of chemicals or physical agents on biological systems in an ecological context. This course takes a multidisciplinary approach to understanding biological effects and their assessment. Prerequisites: BIOL 208, ZOOL 241, and CHEM 164 or 261, or instructor consent.
BIOL 361 Marine Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to marine science and marine biology including history of marine exploration, essential features of the physical marine environment, a survey of major marine communities and adaptations of the organisms that live in each, overviews of selected groups of marine organisms (e.g., marine mammals), and human impact on the oceans. Recommended as preparation for courses offered through the Bamfield Marine Station (see courses listed under MA SC). Prerequisite: ZOOL 250 or BIOL 208.
BIOL 364 Freshwater Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). An introduction to the ecology of freshwater ecosystems. Lectures will examine the roles of biota in ecological patterns and processes in lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams, emphasizing north-temperate and boreal regions. Seminars will focus on recent papers from the primary literature. Designed to stand-alone or to provide a biological complement to BIOL 464. Prerequisite: BIOL 208.
BIOL 365 Methods in Freshwater Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 1-0-3). A practical course introducing students to techniques used in the field and lab to biomonitor lakes and streams. Topics covered will include plankton production and composition, fish and benthos community structure, herbivory and predation, and paleolimnology. The laboratory component includes field trips and independent research projects. Pre or corequisite: BIOL 364 or permission of instructor.
BIOL 366 Northern Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Examines the ecology of boreal and arctic ecosystems, including postglacial history, climate, geology, nutrient cycling and energy flow in forests, wetlands, lakes and marine systems, animal and plant adaptations to cold and current human impacts. Prerequisite: BIOL 208. Credit cannot be obtained for BIOL 366 and any of the following courses: REN R 365, 463, 466.
BIOL 367 Conservation Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course introduces the principles of conservation biology with an emphasis on ecological processes operating at population, community and ecosystem levels of organization. Threats to biological diversity, ranging from species introductions to habitat destruction will be discussed along with conservation solutions ranging from the design of protected areas through conservation legislation. Prerequisite: BIOL 208. Credit cannot be obtained in both BIOL 367 and REN R 364.
BIOL 380 Genetic Analysis of Populations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Application of molecular biology to the study of systematics, structure of natural populations, mating systems, and forensics. Among the topics discussed are molecular techniques used to detect genetic variation in natural populations, methods to construct phylogenies using molecular data, mathematical models of population structure, paternity analysis, and DNA fingerprinting. Prerequisite: BIOL 207. BIOL 321 recommended.
BIOL 381 A Planet in Crisis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course examines how humankind’s collective activities, including altering the climate, have significantly affected the natural planetary balance. We will discuss human population growth and unsustainable resource use; the movement of pollutants through the atmosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere; the impacts these stressors have on ecosystem services and human health; and how certain impacts have been and can be mitigated by environmental policies and laws. Groups of students will produce a short video documentary on a topic related to how humans impact their environment. Prerequisite: BIOL 208.
BIOL 384 Global Change and Ecosystems =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Ecological impacts of climate change and large- scale human activities on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. The focus of this course is to learn to write brief technical summaries of current environment issues, in a fashion that can be understood by an educated citizen. Topics such as climate change, water management projects, invasion of exotic species and national parks management are presented as the forum to evaluate options, trade-offs and solutions to environmental social issues. Prerequisites: BIOL 208 or consent of Instructor. BOT 205 recommended.
BIOL 391 Techniques in Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-6). A laboratory course introducing students to techniques in gene manipulation, protein expression and bioinformatics by following a gene through a thematic series of molecular manipulations. Restricted to Honors and Specialization students in Biological Sciences and consent of instructor. Prerequisites: BIOL 207 and BIOCH 200. Not to be taken by students currently enrolled in GENET 420 or with credit in GENET 420. Credit can be obtained for only one of BIOL 391, IMIN 391 or MMI 391.
BIOL 392 Laboratory Techniques in Molecular Ecology and Systematics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-1s-6). A laboratory course introducing students to current molecular biology techniques and associated analyses used to study population genetics, systematics, and evolutionary biology in natural populations. Students will develop microsatellite marker systems and use them to examine the genetic structure of a natural population. A comparative bioinformatic approach will be used to generate sequence data to investigate the use of single nucleotide polymorphisms in candidate gene analysis and in phylogenetic inference. Prerequisite: BIOL 207, 208 and consent of instructor, corequisite: BIOL 380. Note: BIOL 392 and 592 cannot both be taken for credit.
BIOL 398 Research Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Normally for students in their third year of study. Successful completion of this course requires a written report on the research project. Prerequisites: A 200-level Biological Sciences course and consent of the Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Credit for this course may be obtained only once.
BIOL 399 Research Project =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Normally for students in their third year of study. Successful completion of this course requires a written report on the research project. Prerequisites: A 200-level Biological Sciences course and consent of the Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Credit for this course may be obtained only once.
BIOL 409 Zoonoses Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the biology of zoonotic agents and the implication of host-pathogen interactions to disease susceptibility and resistance. Students will apply these basic concepts towards the understanding of issues governing pathogenesis, pathology, epidemiology, control and surveillance of zoonotic diseases. Focus will be placed on zoonotic agents currently having a significant impact on animal and public health. Lectures will be followed by active discussion of selected readings. Prerequisites: one of IMIN 200, ZOOL 352, ZOOL 354, ENT 392 or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 409 and BIOL 509.
BIOL 421 Molecular Evolution and Systematics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Methods for inferring evolutionary trees and their applications to the fields of comparative biology, molecular evolution, and systematics. Topics to be covered include phylogenetic inference, molecular evolution integrated at the organismal and population level, and evolutionary developmental genetics. Labs emphasize practical experience in data analysis. Prerequisite: BIOL 335 or consent of instructor. BIOL 380 or 392 recommended. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 421 and BIOL 521. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 430 Experimental Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Emphasis is on the design of experiments and analysis of data collected from field and laboratory studies in Biology. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and a 300-level Biological Sciences course. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 430 and REN R 480.
BIOL 432 Field Methods in Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-6). Design, execution, analysis, and presentation of problems in behavioral, population, and community ecology in a field environment. Field exercises, demonstration of techniques, and data collection for independent projects will take place during the two weeks preceding the Fall term at a field station off the main campus. Final reports are due in the last week of September. Prerequisites: BIOL 331 or 332 or ZOOL 371 or BOT 332; a statistics course such as STAT 151 or SCI 151, BIOL 330 or 430. This course requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
BIOL 433 Plant-Animal Interactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Plants and animals have a long co-evolutionary history, and this course explores many of the ways in which plants and animals use and abuse each other. Specific topics include pollination biology, herbivory, and dispersal. Emphasis is on both the evolutionary ecology and ecological implications of these interactions. Prerequisite: BIOL 331 or 332 or BOT 332 or ZOOL 371.
BIOL 434 Chemical Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to the broad field of Chemical Ecology through survey, discussion and analysis of current and historical literature. Topics include a wide array of chemically-mediated ecological interactions in a variety of taxa. Studies that analyze the importance of the use of chemical signals for habitat selection, resource acquisition, reproduction, defense and social interactions are discussed. Students research topics in Chemical Ecology and present their findings in oral and written formats. Prerequisite: BIOL 208. CHEM 164 or 261 recommended. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 434 and 534. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 440 Watershed Ecohydrology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). The course will introduce students to theory and techniques employed in the analysis of physical, hydrological, chemical, and ecological properties of ecosystems using a watershed (catchment) approach. Focus will be on landscape interactions or linkages between upland, wetland/ riparian, and surface-water in the study of the natural ecohydrologic function and response to disturbance of watershed ecosystems. Emphasis will be placed on Boreal Alberta. Topics are covered through reading the literature and group discussions. Prerequisite: BIOL 333 or 340 or 364 or EAS 223 or REN R 350, or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 440 and 540.
BIOL 445 Current Topics in Animal and Cell Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Survey, discussion and evaluation of literature dealing with current advances and selected topics in animal and cell physiology. Prerequisite: ZOOL 340 or 342 or 343, or PHYSL 372. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 468 Problems in Conservation Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Seminar and reading course dealing with current problems in conservation biology. Prerequisites: BIOL 367 or REN R 364 and consent of instructor.
BIOL 471 Landscape Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Landscapes are holistic entities whose patterns influence ecological processes. Topics highlighted in this course include landscape components, morphology and dynamics; detecting spatial/temporal change in landscapes; issues of scales; movements of organisms, disturbances, and nutrients across landscape mosaics; and restoration, planning and management in a landscape context. Labs emphasize GIS applications to characterizing landscape patterns and heterogeneity in space and time, distributing and moving organisms across landscapes, and restoring or planning landscapes for conservation objectives. Prerequisites: MATH 115 or SCI 100; STAT 151 or SCI 151; one of BIOL 331, 332 or BOT 332. Previous GIS course is useful. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 471 and 571.
BIOL 490 Individual Study =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Registration will be contingent on the student’s having made prior arrangements with a faculty member willing to supervise the program. Credit may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: A 300-level Biological Sciences course and consent of the Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies.
BIOL 495 Special Topics in Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to advanced undergraduates in Biological Sciences. Consult the Department for details about current offerings. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 498 Research Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Normally for students in their fourth year of study. Successful completion of this course requires a written report on the research project. Credit may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: A 300-level Biological Sciences course and consent of the Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies.
BIOL 499 Research Project =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Normally for students in their fourth year of study. Successful completion of this course requires an oral presentation and a written report on the research project. Prerequisites: A 300-level Biological Sciences course and the consent of the Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Note: Students in Honors in Biological Sciences are required to successfully complete BIOL 499.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in graduate programs in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee: BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415; NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
BIOL 501 Applied Bioinformatics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Discussion of computational tools and databases used in the analysis of data from high-throughput molecular biology studies. Students will use existing tools, learn the underlying algorithms and their limitations, and will be required to complete an individual research project. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOIN 301 and BIOL 501.
BIOL 506 Systematics and Evolution Forum Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 1-1s-0). Lectures and discussions on a variety of subjects in systematics and evolutionary biology by graduate students, staff, and visiting speakers. Credit may be obtained more than once. Prerequisite: consent of instructors for students not registered in the systematics and evolution graduate program.
BIOL 509 Advanced Topics in Zoonoses Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the biology of zoonotic agents and the implication of host-pathogen interactions to disease susceptibility and resistance. Students will apply these basic concepts towards the understanding of issues governing pathogenesis, pathology, epidemiology, control and surveillance of zoonotic diseases. Focus will be placed on zoonotic agents currently having a significant impact on animal and public health. Lectures will be followed by active discussion of selected readings. Scheduled classes are the same as for BIOL 409, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 409 and BIOL 509.
BIOL 521 Advanced Molecular Evolution and Systematics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Methods for inferring evolutionary trees and their applications to the fields of comparative biology, molecular evolution, and systematics. Topics to be covered include phylogenetic inference, molecular evolution integrated at the organismal and population level, and evolutionary developmental genetics. Labs emphasize practical experience in data analysis. Lectures and labs are the same as BIOL 421, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 421 and BIOL 521. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 534 Advanced Chemical Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to the broad field of Chemical Ecology through survey, discussion and analysis of current and historical literature. Topics include a wide array of chemically-mediated ecological interactions in a variety of taxa. Studies that analyze the importance of the use of chemical signals for habitat selection, resource acquisition, reproduction, defense and social interactions are discussed. Students research topics in Chemical Ecology and present their findings in oral and written formats. Graduate students complete an additional assignment and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 434 and 534. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 540 Advanced Watershed Ecohydrology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). The course will introduce students to theory and techniques employed in the analysis of physical, hydrological, chemical, and ecological properties of ecosystems using a watershed (catchment) approach. Focus will be on landscape approaches relating interactions or linkages between upland, wetland/riparian, and surface-water in the study of the natural ecohydrologic function and response to disturbance of watershed ecosystems. Emphasis will be placed on Boreal Alberta. Topics are covered through reading the literature and group discussions. Seminars are the same as for BIOL 440, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 440 and 540.
BIOL 545 Advanced Topics in Animal and Cell Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Survey, discussion and evaluation of literature dealing with current advances and selected topics in animal and cell physiology. Credit may be obtained more than once. Discussions are the same as for BIOL 445, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Enrolment of students by consent of instructor. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 560 Current Problems in Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Seminar and reading on current problems concerning selected aspects of ecology. More than one section may be available and topics change from year to year. Please consult the Department for current information. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Prerequisite: at least one 400-level ecology course.
BIOL 570 Models in Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-1). Formulation, analysis, parameterization, and validation of quantitative models for ecological processes. Applications include population dynamics, species interactions, movement, and spatial processes. Approaches include classical hypothesis testing, computer simulation, differential equations, individual-based models, least squares, likelihood, matrix equations, Markov processes, multiple working hypotheses, and stochastic processes. The lab covers computer simulation methods. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Offered in alternate years.
BIOL 571 Landscape Ecology and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Landscapes are holistic entities whose patterns influence ecological processes. Topics highlighted in this course include landscape components, morphology and dynamics; detecting spatial/temporal change in landscapes; issues of scales; movements of organisms, disturbances, and nutrients across landscape mosaics; and restoration, planning and management in a landscape context. Labs emphasize GIS applications to characterizing landscape patterns and heterogeneity in space and time, distributing and moving organisms across landscapes, and restoring or planning landscapes for conservation objectives. Lectures and labs are the same as for BIOL 471, but with an additional research project and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 471 and 571.
BIOL 592 Laboratory Techniques in Molecular Ecology and Systematics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-1s-6). A laboratory course introducing students to current molecular biology techniques and associated analyses used to study population genetics, systematics, and evolutionary biology in natural populations. Students will develop microsatellite marker systems and use them to examine the genetic structure of a natural population. A comparative bioinformatic approach will be used to generate sequence data to investigate the use of single nucleotide polymorphisms in candidate gene analysis and in phylogenetic inference. Labs are the same as BIOL 392, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor, corequisite: BIOL 380. Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 392 and 592.
BIOL 595 Special Topics in Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to graduate students in Biological Sciences. Consult the Department for details about current offerings. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 603 Advanced Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Designed for new graduate students in environmental biology to foster critical thinking and discussion and to introduce them to issues of experimental design and analysis and different approaches to ecology. The course involves student discussion of papers, lectures by faculty members on their research, seminars by students and a written assignment. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Preference will be given to students in Biological Sciences.
BIOL 631 Seminar in Ecology and Evolution Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). Credit may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 633 Advanced Techniques in Biology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). This course will cover specialized topics of current interest to graduate students in Biological Sciences with an emphasis on learning new research skills. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 642 Seminars in Physiology, Cell and Developmental Biology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 698 Undergraduate Research Mentoring Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course for graduate students who are mentoring undergraduates in a research course (BIOL 398, 490 and 498) under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Mentorship includes activities such as in lab or field supervision, training, and help with reports and presentations. Consent of Department of Biological Sciences required. Can be taken in any year. Credit may be obtained more than once.
BIOL 699 Undergraduate Research Mentoring Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course for graduate students who are mentoring undergraduates in a research course (BIOL 299, 399 and 499) under the supervision of an academic member of the Department of Biological Sciences. Mentorship includes activities such as in lab or field supervision, training, and help with reports and presentations. Consent of Department of Biological Sciences required. Can be taken in any year. Credit may be obtained more than once.
#
Biomedical Engineering
BME
Department of Biomedical Engineering Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Note: See also EE BE 512 and 540 which may be taken as courses in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
BME 320 Human Anatomy and Physiology: Cells and Tissue Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the fundamental levels of organization of the human body highlighted in engineering terms. The first half of the course will consider the chemical, cellular, and tissue levels of organization. The second half of the course will be devoted to bone, joints, muscle, and neural tissue. Guest lectures will include engineers and medical scientists to discuss the relationship between recent advances in biomedical engineering and the underlying anatomy and physiology. This course is intended for students in the Faculty of Engineering. Students from other faculties must obtain the consent of the Department of Biomedical Engineering. Credit may be obtained for only BME 210 or 320.
BME 321 Human Anatomy and Physiology: Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the organization of the human body at the level of the anatomical systems highlighted in engineering terms. Lectures will be devoted to the circulatory, respiratory, digestive, urinary, nervous and endocrine systems, and fluid, electrolyte and acid-base homeostasis. Guest lectures will include engineers and medical scientists to discuss the relationship between recent advances in biomedical engineering and the underlying anatomy and physiology. This course is intended for students in the Faculty of Engineering. Students from other faculties must obtain the consent of the Department of Biomedical Engineering. Credit may be obtained for only BME 211 or 321. Prerequisite: BME 320 or consent of Instructor.
BME 410 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering and Biomedical Systems Modelling =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduces the broad field of biomedical engineering while focusing on the quantitative methods and modelling in key areas that emphasize the similarities between biomedical and conventional engineering science. Practical numerical models of several body systems will be covered, with an emphasis on development, evaluation and validation of realistic physiological models using computational methods. Intended primarily for undergraduate students of the Engineering program. Students from other faculties must obtain the consent of the Department of Biomedical Engineering. Prerequisite BME 320.
Graduate Courses
BME 510 Neuroimaging in Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Neuroimaging has developed rapidly in recent years, and has had a profound effect on how we understand the human brain. This advanced course is aimed to provide graduate students and senior undergraduate students a comprehensive overview of the neuroimaging techniques (structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), MRI spectroscopy (MRS) etc) currently used in neuroscience research. In addition, we will discuss how neuroimaging methods can advance our understanding of healthy brain function and neuropsychiatric disorders. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
BME 511 Stem Cell Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). This course will give an overview of the stem cell biology and biomedical applications. Topics will include biological aspects of stem cells, environmental factors and signals that are implicated in regulating stem cell fate, the practical use of stem cells for tissue engineering and cellular therapies. The course will highlight techniques for engineering of stem cells and their micro-environments. The ethical, legal, and regulatory issues that accompany current and emerging stem cell engineering applications will be also discussed. This course is designed for upper undergraduates and graduate students with a strong interest in stem cell biology and stem cell engineering, and the desire to actively contribute to discussions in the class. Pre-requisites: BME 320 or consent of instructor.
BME 513 Imaging Methods in Medicine =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduction to basic physical and technological aspects of medical imaging. Emphasis on computed transmission and emission tomography, magnetic resonance, and ultrasound imaging. These methods are developed and contrasted in terms of how imaging information is generated, detected, and processed and how different hardware configurations and other factors limit image quality. Relative diagnostic potential of the imaging methods is also discussed in relation to future prospects of each method.
BME 520 Neuroplasticity Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An advanced course for graduate students in Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering that covers the cellular and systems level changes in sensorimotor and pain pathways in response to motor training and/or trauma to the nervous system. A background on experimental techniques and mechanisms of neuronal plasticity from key studies in cortical, spinal and dorsal horn systems will be provided. Students are expected to write and present on current topics in the field of motor and pain neuroplasticity. Students should have a basic background in neurophysiology. Prerequisites: PMCOL 371 and PHYSL 372 or equivalents or consent of instructor.
BME 530 Topics in Biomedical Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual sections covering such topics as signal processing and rehabilitation engineering. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
BME 553 Rehabilitation Engineering: Assisted Movement After Injury =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Introduction to rehabilitation techniques for assisting individuals with physical disabilities to reach, stand and walk. Biomechanics of intact and pathological movements and the use of assistive devices such as exoskeletal orthotics, neuroprosthetic devices and locomotor training are emphasized. Students are exposed to the concepts of biomechanical modeling, motion analysis, electrical stimulation, control systems, neuroregeneration, and pharmacology. Prerequisite: BME 320 and 321 or consent of Instructor.
BME 564 Fundamentals of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRI Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students requiring a thorough grounding in the fundamentals of imaging by means of nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR. Topics include the principles of NMR as applied to imaging, image processing, imaging techniques for achieving specific types of contrast, image artefacts, and typical applications. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
BME 600 Seminars in Biomedical Engineering Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s/2-0). Series of seminars exposing graduate students to the various areas of research and providing a forum for progress reports in individual areas. Seminars by research workers from inside and outside the University are included. Seminars are informal with ample opportunity for discussion.
BME 630 Advanced Topics in Biomedical Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
#
Botany (Biological Sciences)
BOT
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Biology (BIOL); Entomology (ENT); Genetics (GENET); Microbiology (MICRB); Zoology (ZOOL).
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
BOT 205 Fundamentals of Plant Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An overview of the diversity and biology of organisms traditionally included in the Plant Kingdom (algae, fungi, lichens, mosses, ferns, gymnosperms and flowering plants). Emphasis throughout the course is on the relationship between structural and functional innovations in plants and how these have influenced their reproduction and evolution in various ecosystems. Symbioses and co-evolutionary relationships between or among different kinds of plants, and with other groups of organisms, are also considered. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 205 and PL SC 221.
BOT 303 Plant Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The generation of a functional plant requires the spatially coordinated acquisition of numerous cell identities. Examines developmental processes in plants at the molecular and cellular level and will cover: body axis establishment and tissue pattern formation during embryogenesis, cell-to-cell communication in patterning events and differentiation processes, and cell differentiation patterns in tissue systems. Emphasis throughout the course will be on current research using developmental mutants. Prerequisites: BIOL 201 and 207; one of BOT 205 or 340 strongly recommended.
BOT 308 Plant Anatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-3). Seed plant structure and development with particular emphasis on flowering plants. The course covers origin, development, and function of meristems (apical, primary, and lateral), tissue and organ development, wood structure and identification, floral anatomy, embryogenesis, and fruit structure. Prerequisites: BIOL 108 or SCI 100. BOT 205 recommended. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 314 Biology of Bryophytes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Bryophytes (hornworts, liverworts and mosses) form a unique group of basal land plants that are pivotal for understanding evolution of life in terrestrial environments. This course covers the evolution, systematics and ecological diversity of bryophytes of the world, using morphological, molecular and developmental data. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100 and a 200-level Biology course (BOT 205 or 210 recommended) or consent of instructor. Offered in alternate years. This course requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
BOT 321 Flowering Plants =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Modern approaches to the classification and evolution of the flowering plants. The diversity and relationships of the angiosperms are examined from a phylogenetic perspective. Topics include practical and theoretical aspects of species description, nomenclature and phylogeny interpretation, with a focus on the characteristics and significance of the major families of flowering plants in Alberta and from around the world. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100. BOT 205 recommended.
BOT 322 Field Botany =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Lectures, laboratory, and field exercises provide an introduction to description and identification of plants and their local habitats. Factors affecting variation in natural vegetation and methods used to describe it are discussed. Field exercises and projects take place during the two weeks preceding the fall term and some may take place off campus. Presentations take place during the first four weeks of class time in September. Prerequisites: BIOL 108 or SCI 100 and any 200-level Biology course. (BOT 321 is strongly recommended). May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in BOT 304. Offered in alternate years. This course requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
BOT 330 Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function of Algae =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The remarkable biodiversity of algae provides the foundation for most aquatic ecosystems around the world. This course emphasizes the evolution, taxonomy, and ecology of major groups of algae to illustrate relationships between their form and function in pristine and polluted environments. Laboratories will focus on the taxonomic diversity of algae through the use of field surveys of local streams and lakes, and experiments using our extensive algal culture collection. Prerequisite: 200-level Biology course. Both BOT 205 and BIOL 208 recommended. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 332 Plant Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Study of the local factors, which limit plant growth, reproduction, and diversity. Particular emphasis on the mechanisms by which plants interact with their local environment and the effects of these interactions on diversity and community functioning. Specific topics include plant foraging, germination ecology, mechanisms of competition and facilitation, patterns of diversity, and community stability. Prerequisites: BIOL 208 and STAT 151 or SCI 151. BOT 205 recommended. This course requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
BOT 340 Plant Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). This course explores how plants function. Topics include water transport and the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, photosynthesis and carbon resource utilization, nitrogen nutrition and symbioses, photosensing, and responses to environmental stresses such as attack by pests and pathogens. Laboratories introduce both classical and contemporary methods in plant physiology. Prerequisites: BIOL 107; CHEM 101 or 164 or 261; and a 200-level Biological Sciences course or PL SC 221. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 340 and 540. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of BIOL 107 and CHEM 101.
BOT 380 Drug Plants =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Survey of historical and current use of important drug-producing plants. Evaluation of the chemistry and physiology of biologically active compounds from poisonous, analgesic, and hallucinogenic plants, and the current uses of such plant products. Use of plant biotechnology to develop drug- producing plants. Prerequisite: a 200-level Biological Sciences course or BIOCH 200. BOT 205 recommended.
BOT 382 Plant Biotechnology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Using examples from current research, techniques used in modern plant biotechnology and the way this technology is being used to modify and improve economically important plants and their use as biofactories will be discussed. Specific topics will include; gene isolation, plant transformation, plant tissue culture, clonal plant propagation, and somatic embryogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOL 107 or SCI 100 and a 200-level Biological Sciences course. BOT 205 recommended. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 382 and PL SC 491. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 411 Paleobotany =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The fossil record of plants as it relates to the evolutionary history of existing groups. Prerequisite: A 300-level Biological or Earth Sciences course and BOT 205 or 210 or consent of Instructor. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 445 Molecular Plant Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Plant responses to their environment are underpinned by myriad molecular events. This course examines the molecular and cellular biology of plant responses to environmental cues, with an emphasis on signalling and regulation of gene expression mediating physiological responses. Topics such as plant cell walls, phytohormone action, photoreceptors, and programmed cell death will be covered. Prerequisite: BOT 382 or GENET 364 or consent of the instructor. BOT 240 or 340 recommended. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 445 and BOT 545. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 464 Plant Functional Genomics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Through a combination of lectures, discussions, and computer-based exercises, skills are taught for the analysis of large-scale molecular data sets (e.g. genomic, transcriptomic, or proteomic data). These analytical skills are applied to recently published studies to derive biologically relevant information about the physiology and development of plants. Prerequisite: GENET 364 or consent of the instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 464 and 564. Offered in alternate years.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in graduate programs in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee. BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415, 520; NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
BOT 540 Advanced Plant Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). This course explores how plants function. Topics include water transport and the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, photosynthesis and carbon resource utilization, nitrogen nutrition and symbioses, photosensing, and responses to environmental stresses such as attack by pests and pathogens. Lectures, assignments and exams are the same as BOT 340 with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Normally, BOT 540 students will also participate in the BOT 340 laboratory component. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 340 and 540.
BOT 545 Advanced Molecular Plant Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Plant responses to their environment are underpinned by myriad molecular events. This course examines the molecular and cellular biology of plant responses to environmental cues, with an emphasis on signalling and regulation of gene expression mediating physiological responses. Topics such as plant cell walls, phytohormone action, photoreceptors, and programmed cell death will be covered. Lectures are the same as for BOT 445, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 445 and 545. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 564 Advanced Plant Functional Genomics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Through a combination of lectures, discussions, and computer-based exercises, skills are taught for the analysis of large-scale molecular data sets (e.g. genomic, transcriptomic, or proteomic data). These analytical skills are applied to recently published studies to derive biologically relevant information about the physiology and development of plants. Scheduled classes are the same as for BOT 464, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both BOT 464 and 564. Offered in alternate years.
BOT 600 Seminar in Plant Biology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
#
Business
BUS
Department of Strategic Management and Organization Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all BUS courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
BUS 201 Introduction to Canadian Business Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 2-0-1.5). Provides students with an introduction to the Canadian business environment, including the influence of global and other macroeconomic factors on Canadian business. Students learn how to analyze business cases and problems, how to develop tools for ethical decision making in business, and how to create a business plan. Students improve research, communications, presentation, leadership and group skills. Open only to students in the Faculty of Business. Students may take only one of BUS 201 or BUS 202.
BUS 202 Introduction to Canadian Business for International Students Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 2-0-1.5). Provides students with an introduction to the Faculty of Business and the functional areas of business. Special emphasis is made on the Canadian business environment and the skills necessary to live and work in Canada. A Business Plan will be a central aspect of the course. Students improve research, communications, presentation, leadership and group skills. Open only to students in the Faculty of Business. Recommended only for International Students. Not open to students with credit in BUS 201.
BUS 301 Business Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a practical skill development course open to students of all majors in any year of a Business program. Good communication in business matters. This course will help develop writing confidence and strategies for professional business applications. The focus is on hands-on guided practice and uses business scenarios to emphasize technical and persuasive writing as well as an understanding of the skills required to begin a successful business career. In addition students will develop a strong resume, cover letter and a personal brand.
BUS 465 Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical application of business skills and theory to a problem or issues addressed during a period of 13 - 16 weeks of placement in a work environment within Canada. The internship includes preliminary instruction and requires, under the supervision of the Faculty, an approved preliminary proposal and the presentation of a project report to the sponsoring organization. Prerequisites: Consent of the Business Undergraduate Office.
BUS 466 International Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical application of business skills and theory to a problem or issues addressed during a period of 13 - 16 weeks of placement in a work environment outside of Canada. The internship includes preliminary instruction and requires, under the supervision of the Faculty, an approved preliminary proposal and the presentation of a project report to the sponsoring organization. Prerequisites: Consent of the Business Undergraduate Office.
BUS 480 Special Projects Course Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course applies the techniques developed in several Business courses to a group project or a business case analysis. The emphasis in the projects is on integrated approaches to business problems. Student groups will work on consulting projects from businesses and other organizations in and near Edmonton. Groups will work on their projects under the supervision of the instructor(s). An approved preliminary proposal is required. Prerequisites: Consent of Instructor and the Undergraduate Office. Open only to fourth year students.
BUS 488 Selected Topics in Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third and fourth year Business students. Prerequisite: consent of Faculty of Business. Additional prerequisites may be required.
BUS 490 Business Competition Part I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Preparation for Student Competition in Business. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
BUS 491 Business Competition Part II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Completion of Student Competition in Business. Prerequisite: BUS 490 and consent of Instructor.
Graduate Courses
BUS 501 Business Skills Orientation Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, variable). Orientation to the MBA program, including primers on team building, ethics and academic integrity, time/life management, public speaking, library resources, career planning and business etiquette.
BUS 504 Career Management Skills Œ0 (fi 1) (variable, variable). This course prepares students for long-term career success by examining career goals and strategy, networking, personal branding, tailored job applications, and ongoing career management.
BUS 505 Ethics and Corporate Social Responsibility with Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the application of moral principles and models for ethical decision making to individuals and businesses in the 21st century. Contemporary ethical and social issues will be examined through the use of case studies, class discussions and presentations. Topics include concepts of individual ethics, workplace issues, corporate compliance and social and environmental responsibility. While examining ethical issues, emphasis will be placed on improving students’ proficiency levels in verbal and written business communication.
BUS 586 Selected Topics in Business Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics in this seminar may vary from year to year and are chosen at the discretion of the Instructor.
BUS 601 Business Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Students are divided into groups and the groups are assigned a project in either a business or government organization. At the end of the course each group is required to write a report and to make a presentation derived from the project to the other groups in the course. Prerequisite: All required Year 1 MBA core courses.
BUS 640 Strategic Supply Chain Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to the fundamentals of Supply Chain Management and how it relates to a firm’s competitiveness. Emphasis will be placed on the role of SCM in transforming global business practices and relations. SCM informs how a firm would source, design, produce, and market its products in today’s global environment. Topics will include global business trends, current supply chain practices, international procurement, logistics and inventory management, performance assessment, supply management and SCM strategy in a global environment. Prerequisite: BUEC 503.
BUS 648 MBA International Study Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Combines lectures at the University of Alberta with an onsite study tour to a foreign country. The study tour component is normally for a one-to-two week period, during which students participate in company tours and lectures, to develop an appreciation for different business cultures and contexts. Students are usually expected to complete projects or case studies relating to the country under study. Check with MBA office for enrolment restrictions. Credit will not be given for both BUS 648 and any other study tour to the same destination. Students may receive credit for only two of the following three courses: BUS 648, BUEC 648, SMO 648.
BUS 686 Selected Topics in Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
BUS 701 Qualitative Methodology for Business Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines qualitative research methods as they apply to business research. Includes: the terrain and history of qualitative research, exploring different approaches to qualitative research, designing qualitative research, strategies of inquiry, qualitative data analysis, writing up research, and professional and ethical issues. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
BUS 715 Experimental Methods for Behavioural Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of this course is to provide students with an understanding of the essential principles and techniques for conducting scientific experiments on human behavior. It is tailored for individuals with an interest in doing research using experimental methods in areas such as psychology, judgment and decision making, consumer behavior, behavioral economics and finance, organizational behavior, and human performance. Classes are conducted in an interactive seminar format, with extensive discussion of concrete examples, challenges, and solutions. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Associate Dean for the Business PhD Program also required for non-PhD students.
BUS 855 International Study Tour Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 1 week). A week-long intensive course. Understanding the challenges facing local companies in their environment, for example, Asia or Eastern Europe. An on-site visit to the location is included. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUS 860 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics will vary from year to year. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUS 875 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics will vary from year to year. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUS 880 Business Project Œ6 (fi 64) (two term, 3-0-0). Students are required to complete a custom designed project for a client company and prepare a business plan. The company selected could be the student’s own organization or a unit within the organization. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUS 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Business Economics
BUEC
Departments of Marketing, Business Economics, and Law Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all BUS courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
BUEC 311 Business Economics, Organizations and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Business organizations as systems of mutually reinforcing functional areas where decision making is driven by underlying economic forces. Application of economic theory to facilitate complex decision making within organizations: economic models of decision making are linked directly to functional areas of management. Topics include the organization of firms and industries; meeting customer needs; and decision making involving production, resource use, dealing with risk and uncertainty, scale and scope of operations, competitive advantage, and product pricing. Prerequisites: ECON 101, 102, and MATH 113 or equivalent. Students may receive credit for only one of BUEC 301, BUEC 311, MANEC 301 or ECON 383. Not open to students with previous credit in ECON 281.
BUEC 342 Introduction to International Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an introduction to the tools they will require to succeed in the increasingly international business world. Serves as a basis for other more advanced courses in International Business. Topics covered could include Country Differences, International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, Regional Economic Integration, The Foreign Exchange Market and International Business Strategy and Operations. Students may receive credit for only one of BUEC 342, ADMI 342 or 444.
BUEC 363 Introduction to Energy and Resource Industries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to the current Canadian and global energy landscape, key energy industries, regulations, and commodities markets. Examines oil sands, conventional oil sectors, refined products such as gasoline, renewable fuels, natural gas including shale gas, and electricity. Students will also be introduced to environmental issues such as climate change, water, and land use. Students will use economic models of energy demand and supply to determine the environmental and economic advantages/shortcomings of these models in their application to real-world issues, both within Alberta and internationally, and will learn how economics can be used to guide energy policy. Not to be taken by students with credit in BUEC 463.
BUEC 442 The Global Business Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the changing global business environment and how it impacts international business decision-making. Topics covered could include Trends in Globalization, International Business in Canada, Managing Multinational Corporations, Importing and Exporting, International Labor Markets and the Market for Skills, International Financial Markets, Financial Crises, and Corporate Governance in Different Countries. Prerequisite: BUEC 342 or consent of Instructor. Students may receive credit for only one of BUEC 442, 445 or ADMI 445.
BUEC 444 International Study Tours Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is a combination of on site study tours to a foreign country and academic coursework. The study tour component will normally be for a two to three week period, during which students will participate in company tours, lectures and language and cultural study to develop an appreciation for different business cultures and contexts. Upon return, students will be expected to complete a group project or case study relating to the business environment of the country under study. Prerequisites: Preference will be given to students who have completed at least one other international business course in the Faculty of Business.
BUEC 454 Principles of Real Estate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the principles of commercial real estate. Real estate markets and decision making; real estate economics and location; property development; marketing and property management; mortgage lending, real estate investment, brokerage and regulation. Industry guest speakers help link theory with industry practice in their areas of expertise. Prerequisite: BUEC 311 or ECON 281.
BUEC 455 Real Estate Asset Strategies Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Theory, fundamentals and methods in real estate finance and investment; real estate investment analysis and valuation; real estate entities and taxation; leases and corporate real estate; the economics and finance of real estate development; real estate capital markets; land development and the home building industry. This course is designed to provide the student with essential tools to understand how real estate value is determined, created and influenced. Students use software to analyze real estate cases.
BUEC 457 Real Estate Development Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A practicum about real estate development and decision making. Real estate development is a process during which the entrepreneur identifies a site which is underutilized, undertakes the necessary conceptual, design, market, economic, and financial analysis and brings the site to its highest and best use. Topics include market analysis of different types of real estate uses, massing studies, cost estimation and deal structuring, analysis of site constraints and regulation and financial analysis of to-be-built properties. Students in teams undertake the background research and feasibility analysis related to a site and make a final proposal to the instructor. Prerequisite: BUEC 311 or ECON 281 or consent of instructor.
BUEC 463 Energy and the Environment: Industry Structure, Performance and Challenges Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Uses the basic tools of business economics in order to gain a better understanding of energy markets and industries. Differences and similarities between specific industries (oil, gas, electricity, etc.) and between different industry segments (exploration, production, retail, etc.) are highlighted. New challenges faced by the industry, most notably environmental concerns, but also globalization and new forms of competition, are analysed with respect to the impacts that they have had and might have in the future on firms’ strategies and on market performance. Prerequisite: BUEC 311 or ECON 281.
BUEC 464 Environmental Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the theory and application of environmental economics and its role in management and policy-making. The course will cover development of a model of pollution control, evaluation of policy in this context, the setting of optimal environmental policies, and the application of these policies. Particular policies and practices implemented in North America will be examined. Prerequisite: BUEC 311 or ECON 281.
BUEC 479 Government and Business in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of business in the public policy process: how business organizations influence public policy and its administration, and how public policies affect business. Processes of change are of particular interest. Attention is to the motivation, behavior patterns, and the dynamics of the interaction of different stakeholder groups, policy makers, and managers responsible for the implementation of public policies. Develops a framework for analysis of the effectiveness and efficiency of different fiscal, regulatory, and promotional policies; consideration is given to the impact of technological, economic, and social change on policy choice in the long term. Prerequisite: BUEC 311 or ECON 281.
BUEC 488 Selected Topics in Business Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites: BUEC 311 or ECON 281, or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
BUEC 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
BUEC 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: BUEC 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
BUEC 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: BUEC 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
BUEC 503 Economic Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on economic decision making at the level of the firm and consumer, utilizing demand and supply analysis to help understand a variety of economic and managerial issues. Formal models of managerial economic problems will be developed and used for purposes of analysis. The course will also deal with public economics, regulatory economics and introduce issues of information economics and strategic behavior. The theory of public choice and public goods will be used to analyze a variety of public economic issues. The course will also cover macroeconomic issues including: measuring macroeconomic variables, sources of economic growth, business cycles, interest rates, exchange rates, government debt, and other topics. Credit will not be given for both BUEC 502 and 503.
BUEC 542 International Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an introduction to the tools they will require to succeed in the increasingly international business world. Serves as a basis for other more advanced courses in International Business, covering such topics as Country Differences, International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, Regional Economic Integration, The Foreign Exchange Market and International Business Strategy and Operations. This course will also cover selective topics in international macro economics. Prerequisite: BUEC 502 or 503. Not open to students who have taken BUEC 541.
BUEC 563 Energy Industries and Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a broad introduction to the energy industries and markets, focusing on market structure, firm strategy and behavior, regulation and public policy. The evolving nature of industries and markets, including technological challenges, environmental constraints and globalization, are discussed. The course includes a number of site visits and guest speakers. Prerequisite: BUEC 502 or 503. Not open to students with credit in BUEC 560.
BUEC 564 Environmental Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The economic theory of externalities is introduced and applied in a discussion of alternative policy instruments such as taxes, tradable permits, and regulatory standards which are used to deal with pollution. Topics include current environmental regulation issues such as climate change, water and air pollution and firm strategy. Extensions include an introduction to cost-benefit analysis and environmental impact assessment tools for project evaluation as well as a discussion of the economics of non-renewable resources. Prerequisite: BUEC 502 or 503. Not open to students with credit in BUEC 562.
BUEC 610 Principles of Real Estate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the principles of commercial real estate. Real estate markets and decision making; real estate economics and location; property development; marketing and property management; mortgage lending, real estate investment, brokerage and regulation. Industry guest speakers help link theory with industry practice in their areas of expertise. Prerequisites: BUEC 503.
BUEC 611 Real Estate Asset Strategies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory, fundamentals and methods in real estate finance and investment; real estate investment analysis and valuation; real estate entities and taxation; leases and corporate real estate; the economics and finance of real estate development; real estate capital markets; land development and the home building industry. This course is designed to provide the student with essential tools to understand how real estate value is determined, created and influenced. Students use software to analyze real estate cases. Prerequisites: BUEC 503, and FIN 501 or 502 (or consent of instructor).
BUEC 613 Real Estate Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A practicum about real estate development and decision making. Real estate development is a process during which the entrepreneur identifies a site which is underutilized, undertakes the necessary conceptual, design, market, economic, and financial analysis and brings the site to its highest and best use. Topics include market analysis of different types of real estate uses, massing studies, cost estimation and deal structuring, analysis of site constraints and regulation and financial analysis of to be-built properties. Students in teams undertake the background research and feasibility analysis related to a site and make a final proposal to the instructor. Prerequisites: BUEC 503, and FIN 501 or 502 (or consent of instructor).
BUEC 646 The Global Business Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the changing global business environment and how it impacts international business decision-making. Covers such topics as Trends in Globalization, International Business in Canada, Managing Multinational Corporations, Importing and Exporting, International Labor Markets and the Market for Skills, International Financial Markets, Financial Crises, and Corporate Governance in Different Countries. Prerequisite: BUEC 541 or 542.
BUEC 648 International Study Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Combines lectures at the University of Alberta with an on-site study tour to a foreign country. The study tour component is normally for a one-to-two week period, during which students participate in company tours and lectures, to develop an appreciation for different business cultures and contexts. Students are usually expected to complete projects or case studies relating to the country under study. Check with MBA office for enrolment restrictions. Credit will not be given for both BUEC 648 and any other MBA study tour to the same destination. Students may receive credit for only two of the following three courses: BUS 648, BUEC 648, SMO 648.
BUEC 663 Natural Resources and Energy Capstone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A project-focused course dealing with international market, business and policy issues and challenges in the energy, environment and natural resources sectors. A course designed around an international trip with a focus on knowledge integration and application to international markets through an intense set of visits with firms, organizations and government agencies. The specific content including the location of the trip and issues addressed changes from year to year. The course involves both teamwork and individual research. In exceptional circumstances students can complete an additional project if they are unable to complete the travel component of the course. The course is open only to students registered in the NREE specialization in the final year of the MBA program. Prerequisites: Completion of all core and NREE required courses, or permission from the program office.
BUEC 678 Managing Business-Government Relations in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of business in the public policy process: How business organizations influence public policy and its administration, and how public policies affect business. Processes of change are of particular interest. Attention is placed on the motivation, behavior patterns, and the dynamics of the interaction of different stakeholder groups, policy makers, and managers responsible for the implementation of public policies. Develops a framework for analysis of the effectiveness and efficiency of different fiscal, regulatory, and promotional policies; consideration is given to the impact of technological, economic, and social change on policy choice in the long run. Prerequisites: BUEC 502 or 503.
BUEC 686 Selected Topics in Business Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
BUEC 820 Business Economics Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Outlining the main schools of economic theory, macroeconomic tools and the effects of macroeconomic policy on business performance; reviewing decision-making processes of individual firms, as well as consumer behavior, price theory, marginal analysis, and forms of competition. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUEC 850 Business/Government Interface Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 1 week). A week-long intensive course. Understanding trends affecting business decision making; the regulatory environment; business/ government interfaces; and the management of public affairs. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
BUEC 860 International Business Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding the globalization of business, international trade and trading blocks; planning for market entry and development; exporting, joint ventures, direct investment; developing the skills of an international manager. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
#
Business Law
B LAW
Departments of Marketing, Business Economics, and Law Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all B LAW courses, except B LAW 301, is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
B LAW 301 Legal Foundations of the Canadian Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Synoptic view of Canadian legal system, with emphasis on underlying considerations of social policy. While considering the nature, sources, philosophy, and policy objectives of the law, selected topics from the fields of tort and contract will be analyzed. Credit will be granted for only one of B LAW 301 and ENGG 420.
B LAW 402 Business Contracts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the special types of contracts that are encountered in business and commercial life. Topics include contract of sale, agency, negotiable instruments, insurance, bailment, employment contracts and contracts involving land as well as societal regulation of the freedom of contract. Prerequisite: B LAW 301 or ENGG 420.
B LAW 403 Commercial Transactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integrated analysis of the legal principles applying to commercial transactions, including an examination of the statutes and case law governing the sale of goods, conditional sale and chattel mortgages. Prerequisite: B LAW 301 or ENGG 420.
B LAW 422 Law of Business Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the role of the corporation in the business and commercial life of Canada and Alberta, with emphasis on the small private company. Topics include characteristics of corporate existence, process of incorporation, forming a private company, relationship with third parties, distinction between management and ownership, duties of directors and officers, and shareholder rights. Prerequisite: B LAW 301 or ENGG 420.
B LAW 428 Natural Resource and Environmental Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The legal framework in which managerial decisions affecting the environment are taken. Substance of environmental law and the procedures for enforcing it. Interaction of this legal approach with business strategies for dealing with environmental issues is analyzed. Prerequisite: B LAW 301 or ENGG 420.
B LAW 432 The Legal Regulation of Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the principles of law that underlie the administrative regulation of business by governmental agencies. A representative agency from each of the three levels of government will be analysed to determine how it is created, what powers it possesses, how it uses its powers and how its powers are constrained. Prerequisite: B LAW 301 or ENGG 420.
B LAW 442 International Business Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the law regulating the conduct of international business transactions. This includes trade law (GATT, commodity agreements, economic integration, national rules); finance law (IMF, OECD, ICSID, multinationals, promotion and financing of world trade); and commercial law (payment mechanisms, international commercial contracts, UN Convention on the International Sale of Goods, settlement procedures, pertinent national and international laws). Prerequisite: Open to third-year and fourth-year students.
B LAW 444 International Business Transactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of current international business patterns and the laws surrounding such patterns, with an emphasis on what makes them different from domestic ones. A major force underlying the internationalization of the world economy has been the rapid, sustained growth of international business, both in the traditional form of international trade and in the newer forms of multinational, global and transnational business. This course is designed to provide the student with a basic understanding of the major rules governing cross-border commercial transaction in the contexts of both substantive and procedural law.
B LAW 456 Legal Issues in Real Estate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Real estate law as it applies to business decisions in real estate. Property rights and land title, legal aspects of real estate transactions, real estate finance, entitlement and land use, and the environment. Transactional real estate includes lease agreements, purchase and sale agreements, agency, mortgages and deeds of trust, partnership agreements, construction contracts, builder’s liens and condominium law. The entitlement process includes all aspects of real estate development including land use planning and zoning, infrastructure, acquisition of development permits and building permits, subdivision and the planning process. Relevant environmental law and aboriginal laws are included. Prerequisite: B LAW 301
B LAW 488 Selected Topics in Business Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites: B LAW 301 or consent of department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
B LAW 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
B LAW 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: B LAW 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
B LAW 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: B LAW 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
B LAW 602 Business Contracts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to, and an overview of, the major areas of law generally encountered in business and commercial law, in particular contract law. Not open to students in the MBA/JD Combined Degree Program.
B LAW 612 Legal Issues in Real Estate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Real estate law as it applies to business decisions in real estate. Property rights and land title, legal aspects of real estate transactions, real estate finance, entitlement and land use, and the environment. Transactional real estate includes lease agreements, purchase and sale agreements, agency, mortgages and deeds of trust, partnership agreements, construction contracts, builder’s liens and condominium law. The entitlement process includes all aspects of real estate development including land use planning and zoning, infrastructure, acquisition of development permits and building permits, subdivision and the planning process. Relevant environmental law and aboriginal laws are included.
B LAW 628 Natural Resource and Environmental Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course considers the legal framework in which managerial decisions affecting the environment are taken. It looks at the substances of environmental law and the procedures for enforcing it. The interaction of this legal approach with business strategies for dealing with environmental issues is analyzed.
B LAW 658 Intellectual Property Law and Technology Commercialization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of key legal concepts from a variety of jurisdictions related to intellectual property and its commercialization. The course will follow a comparative case-based approach to explore formal laws, institutions and business practices related to IP in technological innovation. Topics covered may include copyright, trademark, industrial design, database protection, patent law, application process and patent searching, and licensing strategies, with a special focus on the life sciences. The course aims to provide students with the skills required to address legal issues arising from technological innovation.
B LAW 686 Selected Topics in Business Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
#
Cell Biology
CELL
Department of Cell Biology Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
CELL 201 Introduction to Molecular Cell Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory Cell Biology course suitable for students interested in pursuing Cell Biology specialization/honors. This course focuses on the molecular aspects of modern cell biology. Topics covered include the nucleus and gene expression; membrane structure and function; signal transduction; organelle biogenesis; cytoskeleton and cell motility; cell adhesion; the cell cycle; cancer; differentiation and stem cell technology. Reference will be made to key investigations and new technologies that have defined modern cell biology. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or SCI 100. Pre or corequisite: CHEM 164 or 261 or SCI 100. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in BIOL 201, in addition, not available to students currently enrolled in BIOL 201.
CELL 300 Advanced Cell Biology I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Advanced course studying various topics in modern molecular cell biology emphasizing the design of experiments, the interpretation of their results and the extrapolation of their findings. Examines aspects of eukaryotic cell structure and function. Includes, but not restricted to, areas such as protein targeting, organelle biogenesis, intracellular signaling, pathogen-cell interactions and cell-cell interactions. Makes extensive use of scientific literature to illustrate important concepts. Prerequisites: BIOL 201 or CELL 201 and BIOCH 200.
CELL 301 Advanced Cell Biology II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A continuation of CELL 300, covering Cell Biology topics in greater depth, and exploring recent developments in the field. Intended for, but not restricted to, students in the Cell Biology Honors and Specialization programs. Recommended prerequisite: CELL 300 or consent of Department.
CELL 310 Evolution and Diversity of the Cell Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course begins by briefly surveying eukaryotic organismal diversity with an emphasis on unicellular organisms and their biomedical/ ecological impact. The course then examines the variation observed in different cellular systems including the nucleus, endomembrane system, mitochondria and plastids and how they can differ from the well studied models such as yeasts, animals and plants. Each organelle will be explored from morphological, genomic and evolutionary perspectives, making use of current literature when possible. Prerequisite: CELL 201 or BIOL 201.
CELL 398 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Directed research carried out in a laboratory of a member participating in the Cell Biology Program. Credit may be obtained for this course only once. Successful completion requires a written report on the research project. Normally for students in their third year of study. Any 300-level Science course (CELL 300 recommended) and the consent of the Cell Biology Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Closed to web registration. Go to the Department website for project information. This course can also be taken as a six week Spring/Summer session course. www.cellbiology.ualberta.ca
CELL 402 The Birth and Death of a Cell Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An advanced course dealing with cell differentiation, intracellular and extracellular signaling processes, the cell cycle, apoptosis and necrosis. Consists of lecture material and small group learning sessions. Topics include stem cell research, cancer therapy and human disorders involving cell death (e.g., Alzheimer’s and cardiovascular disease). Requires reading and discussion of current research articles. Prerequisite: any 300-level Science course or consent of Department.
CELL 405 Cell Biology of Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the nature and mechanisms of disease processes. Through integration of practical classes with lectures, abnormalities in the structure and function of cells, tissues and organs that underlie disease are explored. Emphasis is placed on current research aimed at understanding the mechanisms of disease and disease therapy. Topics covered may include genetic disorders, cancer, cellular pathology, immunology, microbiology, parasitology and virology. Prerequisite: Any 300-level Science course. Enrolment is limited and registration is by permission of the Department.
CELL 425 Systems Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Systems biology is the molecular analysis of organisms and involves understanding the integrated and interacting network of genes, proteins and biochemical processes that give rise to what we define as life. Systems biology connects and integrates genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics, engineering, cell biology and genetics with mathematics and computational analysis to enable the comprehensive discovery of principles underlying the functioning of living organisms. This course provides the student with the fundamentals of a systems biology approach to understanding organisms. Systems biology projects using database analysis software will be a large component of this course and therefore personal computers are required. Prerequisites: CELL 201, BIOL 201 or consent of Department. Note: Offered in odd-numbered years.
CELL 445 Current Topics in Cell Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Study of recent literature that defines significant advances in cellular and molecular biology research. Introduces students to advancements in cellular and molecular biology research of outstanding quality and interest. Instruction will be provided on critical analysis of research articles, presentation of scientific results, and assessment of research grants. Students will be exposed to current literature through student-led presentations and discussions. Prerequisites: Any 300-level Science course or consent of Department. Enrolment is limited and registration is by consent of Department.
CELL 498 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Directed research carried out in a laboratory of an assigned member participating in the Cell Biology Program. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once. Successful completion requires a written report on the research project. Prerequisites: A 300-level CELL, Biological Sciences, or Biochemistry course and the consent of the Cell Biology Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Closed to web registration. Go to the Department website for project information. This course can also be taken as a six week Spring/Summer session course. www.cellbiology.ualberta.ca.
CELL 499 Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research carried out in a laboratory of a member participating in the Cell Biology Program. The project normally continues through Fall and Winter Terms. Successful completion of this course requires a written report and oral presentation on the research project. Prerequisite: A 300-level CELL, Biological Sciences, or Biochemistry course and consent of the Cell Biology Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies. Closed to web registration. Go to the Department website for project information www.cellbiology.ualberta.ca.
Graduate Courses
CELL 502 The Birth and Death of a Cell Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An advanced course dealing with cell differentiation, intracellular and extracellular signaling processes, the cell cycle, apoptosis and necrosis. Consists of lecture material and small group learning sessions. Topics include stem cell research, cancer therapy and human disorders involving cell death (e.g. Alzheimer’s and cardiovascular disease). Will require reading and discussion of current research articles. Lectures are the same as for CELL 402 but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. May not be taken if credit has already been obtained in CELL 402. Prerequisites: Consent of the Department.
CELL 505 Cell Biology of Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the nature and mechanisms of disease processes. Through integration of practical classes with lectures, abnormalities in the structure and function of cells, tissues and organs that underlie disease are explored. Emphasis is placed on current research aimed at understanding the mechanisms of disease and disease therapy. Topics covered may include genetic disorders, cancer, cellular pathology, immunology, microbiology, parasitology and virology. Enrolment is limited and registration is by permission of the Department.
CELL 525 Systems Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Systems biology is the molecular analysis of organisms and involves understanding the integrated and interacting network of genes, proteins and biochemical processes that give rise to what we define as life. Systems biology connects and integrates genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics, engineering, cell biology and genetics with mathematics and computational analysis to enable the comprehensive discovery of principles underlying the functioning of living organisms. This course provides the student with the fundamentals of a systems biology approach to understanding organisms. Systems biology projects using database analysis software will be a large component of this course and therefore personal computers are required. May not be taken if credit has already been obtained in CELL 425. Enrolment is limited and registration is by permission of the Department. Note: offered in odd-numbered years.
CELL 545 Current Topics in Cell Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Study of recent literature that defines significant advances in cellular and molecular biology research. Introduces students to advancements in cellular and molecular biology research of outstanding quality and interest. Instruction will be provided on critical analysis of research articles, presentation of scientific results, and the construction and assessment of research grants. Students will be exposed to current literature through student-led presentations, discussion, and the development of a research proposal. Prerequisite: Enrolment is limited and registration is by consent of Department.
CELL 671 Recent Advances in Cell Biology Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). A seminar course on topics of current interest in Cell Biology. Students will attend seminars and contribute a journal club presentation based on recent developments published in first rate journals. Note: Open only to Graduate students in Cell Biology.
CELL 672 Recent Advances in Cell Biology Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). A seminar course on topics of current interest in Cell Biology. Students will attend seminars and contribute a presentation on their research project that includes original data. Prerequisite: CELL 671 or consent of the Department. Note: Open only to Graduate students in Cell Biology.
#
Chemical and Materials Engineering
CME
Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
CME 200 Introduction to Chemical and Materials Engineering Œ0.5 (fi 2) (first term, 1 day). Topics of interest to second year Chemical and Materials Engineering students, with special reference to industries in Alberta, including coverage of elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Offered in a single day during the first week of September. Restricted to students registered in the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering.
CME 265 Process Analysis Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Basic process principles; material and energy balances, transient processes, introduction to computer-aided balance calculations. Prerequisites: ENCMP 100, MATH 102 and CHEM 105. Corequisites: CH E 243 and MATH 209 or equivalent. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 265.
CME 421 Mineral Processing Œ3.8 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Unit operations employed to concentrate minerals including comminution, classification, gravity concentration, froth flotation, thickening, filtering; tailings disposal; marketing of minerals; economics. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 331. Prerequisite: STAT 235 or consent of Instructor.
CME 458 Special Projects in Chemical and Materials Engineering I Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-0-7). Projects in Chemical and Materials Engineering. This course is open only to Chemical and Materials Engineering students with a GPA of 3.0 or greater during the previous two academic terms. Variable meeting times. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been earned in CH E 458, 459, MAT E 468 or 469. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
CME 459 Special Projects in Chemical and Materials Engineering II Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-7). Projects in Chemical and Materials Engineering. This course is open only to Chemical and Materials Engineering students with a GPA of 3.0 or greater during the previous two academic terms. Variable meeting times. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been earned in CH E 458, 459, MAT E 468 or 469. Prerequisite: CME 458 and consent of the Department.
CME 472 Extractive Metallurgy Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Physical and chemical preparation of ore feed. Roasting, briquetting, sintering and pelletizing. Leaching processes and chemicals, kinetics of leaching, ion exchange, activated carbon adsorption, solvent extraction and McCabe-Thiele Diagram. Metal recovery from solutions, electrowinning and electrorefining. Furnaces and fuels, refractories, slags and mattes. Reduction of metal compounds, smelting and converting, pyrometallurgical metal refining. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credits have been obtained in MAT E 430 and MAT E 332. Prerequisites: CME 265, MAT E 341, or consent of the Department.
CME 481 Colloquium I Œ1 (fi 3) (either term, 1-0-0). Communication and oral presentations. Graded on a pass/fail basis. Prerequisite: 85 units completed or consent of instructor.
CME 482 Fundamentals of Polymers Œ3.5 (fi 8) (first term, 3-1s-0). Polymerization, molecular weight distribution, molecular weight measurement techniques, isomerism and conformation, rubber elasticity, glass transition, amorphous and crystalline states, crystallization and melting, tensile property, polymer melts and rheology, polymer solutions and blends. May include a tour to a local polymer manufacturer. Prerequisites: STAT 235, CH E 312 and (CH E 343 or MAT E 301 or 340).
CME 483 Colloquium II Œ1 (fi 3) (second term, 1-0-0). Oral presentation of technical material. Graded on a pass/fail basis. Prerequisite: CME 481. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 483.
CME 494 Special Topics in Chemical and Materials Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Treatment of selected chemical and materials engineering special topics of current interest to staff and students.
Graduate Courses
CME 600 Introduction to Research Methods Œ2 (fi 2) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-0-0). This course provides an introduction to research methods specific to engineering disciplines. Topics covered include the philosophy of science and engineering, the scientific method, hypothesis-based research, statistical analysis, literature search and review, developing a research plan, research presentation and reporting, and best practices in experimental, theoretical and computational research. Restricted to graduate students in the Faculty of Engineering. Students from departments other than Chemical and Materials Engineering require instructor approval to register.
CME 694 Advanced Topics in Chemical and Materials Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). An advanced treatment of selected chemical and materials engineering topics of current interest to staff and students.
CME 900 Directed Research Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in a Master of Engineering program.
#
Chemical Engineering
CH E
Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering Faculty of Engineering
The following courses were renumbered effective 2005-06
Old New
CH E 200 CME 200
CH E 265 CME 265
CH E 481 CME 481
CH E 483 CME 483
CH E 683 CME 681
CH E 684 CME 682
CH E 685 CME 683
CH E 686 CME 684
The following courses were renumbered effective 2013-14
Old New
CH E 572 CH E 472
Undergraduate Courses
Note: The Chemical Engineering Department offers a regular academic term from May-August. Courses designated as “Spring/Summer” in this section of the Calendar are part of this academic term and normally run for the full May- August period.
CH E 243 Engineering Thermodynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). An introduction to the first and second laws of thermodynamics. Prerequisites: MATH 101.
CH E 312 Fluid Mechanics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid behavior; hydrostatics; buoyancy, application of Bernoulli and momentum equations; frictional losses through pipes, ducts, and fittings; pipe networks; pumps; drag on submerged bodies and flow through porous media. Prerequisites: CH E 243 EN PH 131 and MATH 209. Corequisite: MATH 201.
CH E 314 Heat Transfer Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Principles of conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer. Design and performance analysis of thermal systems based on these principles. Prerequisites: MATH 201, CH E 312. Corequisite CH E 374.
CH E 316 Equilibrium Stage Process Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2). Design of separation processes with emphasis on the equilibrium stage concept, distillation, absorption and extraction. Prerequisites: CH E 343, 314. Corequisite: CH E 318. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 416.
CH E 318 Mass Transfer Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2). Molecular and turbulent diffusion; mass transfer coefficients; mass transfer equipment design including absorption and cooling towers, adsorption and ion exchange. Prerequisites: CME 265, CH E 312 and 343. Corequisite: CH E 314. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 418.
CH E 343 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Thermodynamics of non-ideal gases and liquids; vapour-liquid equilibrium, thermodynamics of chemical processes and multicomponent systems. Prerequisite: CH E 243. Corequisite: CME 265.
CH E 345 Chemical Reactor Analysis I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Kinetics of chemical reactions and design of ideal chemical reactors. Prerequisites: CME 265, CH E 343 and 374. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 434.
CH E 351 Chemical Engineering Laboratory Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 2-0-3). Technical report writing; thermodynamics, material, and energy balances, and calibration experiments. Prerequisites: ENGL 199 or equivalent, CME 265 and CH E 243. Corequisite: CH E 312.
CH E 358 Process Data Analysis Œ5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-4). Statistical analysis of process data from chemical process plants and course laboratory experiments. Topics covered include least squares regression, analysis of variance, propagation of error, and design of experiments. Prerequisites: CH E 351 and STAT 235. Corequisites: CH E 314 and 345.
CH E 374 Computational Methods in Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Formulation and solution of chemical and materials engineering problems; solution of systems of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations; numerical interpolation, differentiation and integration; numerical solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. Prerequisites: ENCMP 100 (or equivalent). MATH 102, 201 and 209.
CH E 416 Equilibrium Stage Processes Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2). Design of separation processes with emphasis on the equilibrium stage concept, distillation, absorption and extraction. Prerequisites: CH E 343, 314. Corequisite: CH E 318. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 316.
CH E 420 Mixing in the Process Industries Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Design and operation of mixing equipment in the process industries. Process results ranging from blending, solids suspension, and gas dispersion to reactor design and heat transfer will be covered. Emphasis is on application of the fundamentals of chemical engineering. Laminar and turbulent regimes, stirred tanks and static mixers, and other specialized applications will be discussed. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if credit has already been obtained in CH E 520. Corequisite: CH E 464.
CH E 435 Oilsands Engineering Design Œ6 (fi 8) (second term, 4-0-4). Integration of chemical engineering practice, theory and economics into capital project proposal, sustainable design and evaluation. Course work requires pre-session preparation, team and project work. Prerequisites: CH E 445, 446, 464, and ENGG 404. Registration restricted to students in the Oil Sands Elective.
CH E 445 Chemical Reactor Analysis II Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Analysis and design of non-ideal chemical reactors for industrial product synthesis. Prerequisites: CH E 314, 318 and 345.
CH E 446 Process Dynamics and Control Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-3/3). Introduction to process modeling and transient response analysis; design and analysis of feedback systems; stability analysis; process control applications; process control using digital computers. Prerequisites: CME 265, MATH 201 and 209. Corequisite: CH E 312.
CH E 448 Process Control for Mechanical Engineers Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-3/3). Introduction to systems modeling and transient response analysis with an emphasis on mechanical engineering applications; design and analysis of feedback systems; stability analysis; feedforward control; process control applications. Prerequisites: MATH 201 or equivalent, MATH 209, and MEC E 330 or MEC E 331. Corequisite: MEC E 370 or MEC E 371. Restricted to students registered in the Mechanical Engineering program. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 446.
CH E 454 Chemical Engineering Project Laboratory Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 1-0-4). Experiments in kinetics and mass transfer. Prerequisites: CH E 318, 345, 358, and 416.
CH E 464 Chemical Engineering Design I Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Engineering design concepts; cost estimation; project planning and scheduling; plant safety and hazards analysis; selected project design examples. Prerequisites: CH E 314, 345, 316 or 416, and ENG M 310 or 401. Corequisite: ENGG 404. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 365.
CH E 465 Chemical Engineering Design II Œ6 (fi 8) (second term, 4-0-4). Integration of chemical engineering practice, theory and economics into capital project proposal, sustainable design and evaluation. Course work requires pre-session preparation, team and project work. Prerequisites: CH E 446, 464, and ENGG 404.
CH E 472 Modelling Process Dynamics Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-3/3). Mechanistic and empirical modelling of process dynamics; continuous- and discrete-time models; model fitting and regression analysis. Corequisites: CH E 314, 318 and 345. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 572.
CH E 484 Introduction to Biochemical Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). Physical and chemical properties of cells, tissues, and biological fluids, engineering analysis or processes such as cell growth and fermentation, purification of products. Prerequisites: CME 265 or BIOL 107, Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for CH E 390.
CH E 485 Fuel Cells and Their Applications Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Introduction to principles of operation of fuel cells and their applications; historical and environmental perspectives; elementary electrochemistry, types of fuel cell - fuels, membranes and liquid ion conductors, operating conditions; factors affecting performance; applications as standing engines and mobile power sources. Limited to 3rd/4th year undergraduate students in engineering. Prerequisites: CH E 343, MAT E 202 or equivalent and MATH 201 or consent of Instructor.
CH E 494 Special Topics in Chemical Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Treatment of selected chemical engineering special topics of current interest to staff and students.
CH E 512 Introduction to Fluid-Particle Systems Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Unit operations studied in this course include: settlers, thickeners, centrifuges, slurry pipelines and flotation columns. Course topics will also include: one dimensional homogeneous and multiphase flows, sedimentation and fluidization of multi-species systems, and drift flux theory. Prerequisite: CH E 312.
CH E 522 Fundamentals of Oil Sands Upgrading Œ4 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-3/3). Introduction to the physical, chemical and engineering principles required for the design and operation of plants used for the upgrading of heavy oils and bitumens. Prerequisite: CH E 345.
CH E 534 Fundamentals of Oilsands Extraction Œ4 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3/3). Application of fluid mechanics, interfacial phenomena and colloid science to bitumen extraction. Prerequisites: CH E 312 and 314.
CH E 573 Digital Signal Processing for Chemical Engineers Œ3.8 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Time and frequency domain representation of signals; Fourier Transform; spectral analysis of data; analysis of multivariate data; treatment of outliers and missing values in industrial data; filter design. Prerequisites: CH E 358 and 446.
CH E 576 Intermediate Process Control Œ3.8 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Digital and multivariable process control techniques; discrete-time analysis of dynamic systems; digital feedback control; Kalman filter and linear quadratic optimal control; model predictive control. Prerequisite: CH E 446 or equivalent.
CH E 582 Introduction to Biomaterials Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Survey of materials intended for biological applications; biomaterials-related biological phenomena (protein adsorption, blood coagulation and cell adhesion); biomaterials for engineering of blood vessel, bone and skin tissues. Two fundamental engineering philosophies will be stressed: structure-function relationship and purposeful manipulation for a desired outcome. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or BME 210 or CH E 484 or consent of Instructor.
Graduate Courses
Note: All 500-level courses may be taken for graduate credit subject to the approval of the student’s supervisory committee and departmental restrictions on the number of such courses that a student’s program may contain.
CH E 610 Computational Transport Phenomena Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Solutions of the transport equations of momentum, mass and energy. Transport processes are reviewed but emphasis is placed on the numerical solution of the governing differential equations. Different solution methodologies and software are presented.
CH E 611 Advanced Transport Phenomena Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Transport expressions for physical properties are combined with conservation laws to yield generalized equations used to solve a variety of engineering problems in fluid mechanics, and heat and mass transfer; steady-state and transient cases; special topics in non-Newtonian flow and forced diffusion.
CH E 614 Fluid-Particle Systems and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental physical laws governing the behaviour of fluidparticle systems. Particle agglomeration and non-Newtonian pipeline flows; flow through porous media; particle settling; multiparticle drag relationships; particle interactions in dense, coarse particle slurry flows; flowing granular solids. Application of the physical laws in paste or thickened tailings pipelining; horizontal oil well production; oil sand hydrotransport; and bulk solids handling.
CH E 617 Colloids and Interfaces Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Emphasis is on the basics of colloid and interfacial phenomena. Aimed at upper level and graduate students in chemical and mineral engineering, chemistry and geochemistry with an interest in application to the energy sector, mineral processing, materials handling, and chemical industry.
CH E 620 Mixing in the Process Industries Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Design and operation of mixing equipment in the process industries. Process results ranging from blending, solids suspension, and gas dispersion to reactor design and heat transfer will be covered. Laminar and turbulent regimes, stirred tanks and static mixers, and other specialized applications will be discussed. The course integrates fundamental chemical engineering concepts with equipment design, mixing theory, and turbulence theory. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if credit was previously obtained in CH E 420 or CH E 520.
CH E 624 Advanced Thermodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Principles of thermodynamics; properties of homogeneous fluid phases; phase and chemical equilibria; application to industrial problems.
CH E 625 Surface and Statistical Thermodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Advanced topics in macroscopic thermodynamics and fundamentals of statistical thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of composite systems including surface thermodynamics and thermodynamics in fields. Introduction to quantum mechanics. Principles of statistical thermodynamics. Construction of partition functions and calculations of basic thermodynamic properties for several fundamental systems. Applications will include properties of ideal gases, ideal solids and adsorbed gases.
CH E 634 Advanced Chemical Reactor Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Design of homogeneous and heterogeneous reactors for isothermal and non-isothermal operation; analysis of rate data; transport processes in heterogeneous catalytic systems.
CH E 645 Heterogeneous Catalysis and Reactor Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Principles of heterogeneous catalysis and reactor analysis with emphasis on industrial catalytic reactions; characterization of heterogeneous catalysts.
CH E 655 Advanced Biomaterials Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Intended for graduate students who are familiar with basic biomaterials science. Focuses on: molecular design of biomaterial and biomaterial surfaces in order to modulate specific biological events; techniques to modulate biomaterial properties; assessment techniques for modifications. The biological events will be studied at the cellular and molecular level.
CH E 662 Process Identification Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Selected topics related to empirical modelling of process systems are undertaken. Emphasis on time-series based modelling theory and techniques, (e.g., nonparametric, parametric, spectrum analysis, nonlinear, and closed-loop identification methods), model validation, experimental design, and applications in forecasting, analysis, and control.
CH E 674 Numerical Solutions of Engineering Problems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Numerical solutions of engineering problems using linear and nonlinear sets of equations, ordinary and partial differential equations.
CH E 689 Polymer Properties Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Polymerization, molar mass distributions, polymer analytical techniques, solution and blend thermodynamics, physical and chemical properties of polymers, lattice models, rubber thermodynamics, polymer processing, fluid flow and heat transfer in melt processing, special polymer project. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Not open to students with credit in MAT E 467 or CH E 539.
CH E 694 Advanced Topics in Chemical Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An advanced treatment of selected chemical engineering topics of current interest to staff and students.
CH E 696 Special Topics in Process Dynamics and Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Advanced treatment of selected topics in process dynamics and/or computer process control of current interest to staff and students.
#
Chemistry
CHEM
Department of Chemistry Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
CHEM 101 Introductory University Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). Atoms and molecules, states of matter, chemistry of the elements. Prerequisite: Chemistry 30, or equivalent.
CHEM 102 Introductory University Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). Rates of reactions, thermodynamics and equilibrium, electro-chemistry, modern applications of chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 101.
CHEM 103 Introductory University Chemistry I Œ4.3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3/2). Atoms and molecules, states of matter, chemistry of the elements. Prerequisite: Chemistry 30, or equivalent. Note: Restricted to Engineering students only. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0.
CHEM 105 Introductory University Chemistry II Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Rates of reactions, thermodynamics and equilibrium, electrochemistry, modern applications of chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 103. Note: Restricted to Engineering students only. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0.
CHEM 164 Organic Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). The study of basic molecular structure and reactivity of organic compounds based on their functional groups. Introduction to nomenclature, three dimensional structure, physical properties, and reactivity of compounds of carbon. Functional groups covered will emphasize alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkyl halides, alcohols, and some aromatics. Examples will include hydrocarbons (petroleum products), halogenated organic compounds (e.g., pesticides), and polymers of industrial importance which may be found in everyday life. Note: Students who already have credit in CHEM 101 must register in CHEM 261. Prerequisite: Chemistry 30 or equivalent. Restricted to students with CHEM 30 averages of 90% or higher, or departmental approval.
CHEM 211 Quantitative Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). Principles, methods, and experimental applications emphasizing solution phase equilibria, titrimetry, volumetric laboratory skills, evaluation of experimental data, and experimental applications of electrochemistry. Includes examples of organic and inorganic analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 102 or SCI 100.
CHEM 213 Quantitative Analysis II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-4). A continuation of CHEM 211 emphasizing the principles, methods, and experimental applications of separation techniques, and atomic and molecular spectrometry, and evaluation of experimental data. Includes examples of organic and inorganic analysis and use of the analytical literature. Prerequisite: CHEM 211. Students who have previously taken CHEM 313 may not take CHEM 213 for credit.
CHEM 241 Introduction to Inorganic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). The chemistry of main-group elements including a survey of the structure, bonding, and reactivity of their compounds. Transition-metal chemistry will be introduced. The course will include applications in industrial, biochemical, environmental, and materials science. Students who have obtained credit for CHEM 331 cannot take CHEM 241 for credit. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or 105 and CHEM 161 or 164 or 261; or SCI 100.
CHEM 243 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). An extension of CHEM 241 with emphasis on the bonding, structure, and reactivity of transition-metal elements. The course will include applications in industrial, biochemical, environmental, and materials science. For Chemistry Honors and Specialization students only, except by consent of Department. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in CHEM 341. Prerequisites: CHEM 241 or consent of Department.
CHEM 261 Organic Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The correlation of structure and chemical bonding in carbon compounds with the physical properties and chemical reactivity of organic molecules. Discussion will be based on functional groups with emphasis on hydrocarbons and derivatives that contain halogens, oxygen, sulfur, and the hydroxy group. Introduction to stereochemistry, three dimensional structure, reaction mechanisms, especially addition to double bonds, nucleophilic substitution and elimination reactions. Prerequisite CHEM 101 or 103. Note: Students who have obtained credit for CHEM 161 or 164 cannot take CHEM 261 for credit. Engineering students who take this course will receive *4.5.
CHEM 263 Organic Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Continuation of the structural and chemical properties of the basic functional groups of organic compounds including alkynes, aromatic compounds, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and their derivatives and amines. Illustration of these functional groups in natural products such as carbohydrates, amino acids and proteins, nucleic acids and lipids. Discussion of the application of spectroscopic methods for the structure determination in simple organic molecules. Prerequisites: CHEM 161 or 164 or 261 or SCI 100. Note: Students who have obtained credit for CHEM 163 cannot take CHEM 263 for credit.
CHEM 282 Atomic and Molecular Structure Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-4). An introduction to the quantum view of nature with applications to atomic and molecular structure. Methods to describe the quantum world are introduced, used to describe simple electronic, vibrational and rotational structure of model systems, and applied to the hydrogen atom, many-electron atoms, simple diatomic molecules, and the electronic structure of polyatomic molecules. The laboratory portion of the course consists of practical applications enriching and illustrating the lecture material, and incorporates the use of computers as a routine aid to processing experimental results. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or 105; one 200-level CHEM course; MATH 115 and PHYS 124 or 144. Corequisite: PHYS 146 if PHYS 144 presented as a prerequisite instead of PHYS 124. Students with SCI 100 have prerequisite requirements.
CHEM 298 Introductory Spectroscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The course is an integrated introduction to the qualitative and instrumentation aspects of spectroscopy and its applications in chemistry. The subjects will include: absorption, emission, vibrational and rotational spectroscopy of atoms and molecules; and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. For Chemistry Honors and Specialization students only, except by consent of Department. Prerequisite: CHEM 102 or 105 or SCI 100; CHEM 163 or 263.
CHEM 299 Research Opportunity Program in Chemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course for supervised participation in a faculty research project. Normally taken after completion of a minimum of *30 but not more than *60 in a program in the Faculty of Science. Prerequisite: GPA of 2.5 or higher, CHEM 101 or 161 or SCI 100; and consent of Department. Specific projects may require additional prerequisites. Project and course information available at ROP website or Department of Chemistry. Prospective enrollees in CHEM 299 must apply to Department of Chemistry. Application does not guarantee an ROP position. Credit for this course may be obtained twice.
CHEM 300 Introduction to Industrial Chemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 1.5-0-0). A credit/no-credit course that introduces students to the practices, environment, concepts, and other issues associated with the industrial workplace. Course includes lectures by professionals from the local chemical industry, industrial tours, and professional skills development such as resume writing and interviewing. Normally taken after completion of a minimum of 60 but not more than 90 units of course weight in a program in the Department of Chemistry. The course is offered for Chemistry Honors and Specialization students, and for General Science students with consent. Prerequisite: GPA of 2.3 or higher and consent of Department.
CHEM 303 Environmental Chemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The chemistry of environmental processes. Atmospheric chemistry; thermal and photochemical reactions of atmospheric gases including oxygen, ozone, hydroxy radical, and oxides of nitrogen and sulfur. Aquatic chemistry; characterization, reactions, and equilibria of dissolved species, water purification treatments. Metals and organohalides in the environment. Risk assessment. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or SCI 100; CHEM 164 or 261; CHEM 263; and one 200-level CHEM course or CH E 243.
CHEM 305 Environmental Chemistry II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-4). The lecture and laboratory portions of this course will highlight adsorption from aqueous solutions, convective/diffusive transport, vapour/solution equilibria, coagulation of colloids, sedimentation, ion exchange, computer modeling of complex systems, trace analysis of pesticides, chemical treatment of hazardous wastes. Quantitative calculations will be emphasized. The lecture component will provide theoretical background for experiments and instrumentation used for chemical measurements. Prerequisites: CHEM 263; CHEM 213 or 298 or 313; CHEM 303 or 373. Note: Restricted to students in the Environmental Physical Sciences and Chemistry (Honors, Specialization, and General Science with concentration in Chemistry) programs.
CHEM 313 Instrumentation in Chemical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). Instrumentation and analytical applications of spectroscopic, chromatographic and electroanalytical methods are discussed and applied in the laboratory. Prerequisites: CHEM 211; *6 in junior Physics recommended.
CHEM 333 Inorganic Materials Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Fundamentals of the synthesis, structure and properties of inorganic solids, thin films, and nanoscale materials, to be complemented with case studies of modern applications of inorganic materials; selected topics such as catalysis, molecular and nanoparticle-based computing, telecommunications, alternative energies, superconductivity, biomedical technologies, and information storage will be discussed. Techniques for characterization and analysis of materials on the nano and atomic level will be introduced. Prerequisite: CHEM 241.
CHEM 361 Organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). Mechanisms and reactions of aromatic and aliphatic compounds. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or SCI 100; CHEM 163 or 263.
CHEM 363 Organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-4). A continuation of CHEM 361. Prerequisite: CHEM 361.
CHEM 371 Energetics of Chemical Reactions Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A study of the implications of the laws of thermodynamics for transformations of matter including phase changes, chemical reactions, and biological processes. Topics include: thermochemistry; entropy change and spontaneity of processes; activity and chemical potential; chemical and phase equilibria; properties of solutions; simple one- and two-component phase diagrams. The conceptual development of thermodynamic principles from both macroscopic and molecular levels, and the application of these principles to systems of interest to chemists, biochemists, and engineers will be emphasized. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in CHEM 271. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or 105; MATH 101 or 115. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of CHEM 102 and MATH 115. Engineering students who take this course will receive *4.5.
CHEM 373 Physical Properties and Dynamics of Chemical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). A continuation of CHEM 371 in which the physical properties of chemical systems and the dynamics and energetics of chemical processes are discussed. Topics include: colligative properties; electrochemical cells and ion activities, implications for ionic equilibria; kinetic theory and transport properties of gases and liquids; surfaces and colloid chemistry; reaction dynamics, detailed mechanisms of chemical reactions, catalysis. The emphasis will be on the development of principles of physical chemistry and their application to properties and processes of interest to chemists, biochemists, and engineers. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in CHEM 273 or 275. Prerequisite: CHEM 371 or 271.
CHEM 398 Molecular Spectroscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). An integrated course in the quantitative and more advanced aspects of spectroscopy and its applications in chemistry. The subjects may include: absorption, emission, dichroism, vibrational and rotational spectroscopy of molecules; time-resolved spectroscopy; nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; surface-specific spectroscopies. Prerequisites: CHEM 282; 298.
CHEM 401 Introduction to Chemical Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-8). Introduction to methods of chemical research. Investigational work under the direction of a member of the Department. The results of the research will be submitted to the Department as a report which will be graded. The student must also make an oral presentation of this work to the Department. For students in the fourth year of Honors or Specialization Chemistry. Students should consult with the Course Coordinator four months prior to starting the course. Prerequisites: a 300-level CHEM course and consent of the Course Coordinator.
CHEM 403 Chemical Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-8). Investigational work under the direction of a member of the Department. The results of the research will be submitted to the Department as a report, which will be graded. The student must also make an oral presentation of this work to the Department. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 401.
CHEM 405 Special Topics in Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: a 300- level CHEM course and consent of Instructor. Course may be repeated for credit, provided there is no duplication of specific topic.
CHEM 406 Special Topics in Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: vary depending on topic. Check course notes on Bear Tracks for specific prerequisites.
CHEM 419 Bioanalytical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the methods used to analyze biomolecules and the analytical methods that exploit the molecular recognition properties of biomolecules. Topics may include an introduction to biomolecule structure and function, enzyme assays, immunoassays, biosensors, electrophoresis, DNA sequencing techniques, bioinformatics and molecular visualization, molecular biology, and fluorescence imaging. Prerequisites: CHEM 263 and BIOCH 200 and one 300-level CHEM or BIOCH course.
CHEM 424 Optical Spectroscopy and Electrochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Optical spectroscopy and electrochemistry and principles and applications to chemical analysis. Electronic and vibrational spectroscopy for probing and monitoring chemical and biochemical systems. Electrode kinetics, mass transport, and voltammetry for electroanalysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 313.
CHEM 425 Separations and Mass Spectrometry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Concepts and techniques in chromatography, mass spectrometry, and chromatography/MS combinations. Examples of modern instrumentation as well as applications to chemical, biochemical, and biomedical analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 313.
CHEM 434 X-ray Crystallography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to structure determination by single- crystal X-ray diffraction methods. Topics include X-ray diffraction, crystal symmetry, experimental methods, structure solution, refinement, crystallographic software, and interpretation of crystal structure data. Prerequisite: CHEM 243 and one 300-level CHEM course; or CHEM 333 or 341; or consent of the instructor.
CHEM 436 Synthesis and Applications of Inorganic and Nano-materials Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to methods of synthesizing inorganic materials with control of atomic, meso- and micro-structure. Topics include sol-gel chemistry, chemical vapor deposition, solid state reactions, solid-state metathesis and high-temperature self-propagating reactions, template directed syntheses of micro and mesoporous materials, micelles and colloids, synthesis of nanoparticles and nanomaterials. Applications of these synthetic techniques to applications such as photonic materials, heterogeneous catalysts, magnetic data storage media, nanoelectronics, display technologies, alternative energy technologies, and composite materials will be discussed. Prerequisite: CHEM 243 and one 300-level CHEM course; or CHEM 341; or CHEM 333; or consent of the instructor.
CHEM 437 Transition Metal Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). CHEM 437 is an introduction to organotransition metal chemistry. The course will deal with the synthesis, basic bonding, and reactivity of organotransition metal complexes. Topics to be covered include transition metal complexes of hydrides, phosphines, carbonyls, olefins, alkynes, polyolefins, cyclopentadienyl and related cyclic pi-ligands; metal-carbon sigma- and multiple bonds. The application of these complexes to homogeneous catalysis and to organic synthesis will be discussed when appropriate. Prerequisite: CHEM 243 and one 300-level CHEM course; or CHEM 341; or consent of the instructor.
CHEM 438 Solid State Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the chemistry of extended inorganic solids. The topics covered include synthesis, symmetry, descriptive crystal chemistry, bonding, electronic band structures, characterization techniques, and phase diagrams. The correlation of structure with properties of electronic and magnetic materials will be discussed. Prerequisite: CHEM 243 and one 300-level CHEM course; or CHEM 333 or 341 or consent of the instructor.
CHEM 443 Asymmetric Catalysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory course on asymmetric catalysis. Emphasis will be on reactions catalyzed by chiral transition metal complexes, but non-metal catalyzed reactions and heterogeneous catalysis will be covered. Topics include the general principles of catalysis; mechanisms of common steps in catalytic cycles; rapid pre-equilibrium and steady-state kinetic treatments of catalytic rates; the origins of catalytic selection; and the strategies and principles of new catalyst, ligand, and reaction development. The course will include a survey of common enantioselective catalytic reactions and daily examples from ASAP articles that illustrate the principles and theories being taught in the course. Introductory level knowledge of transition metal and organic chemistry is required. Prerequisite: CHEM 243 and one 300-level chemistry course.
CHEM 444 Characterization Methods in Nanoscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to techniques in determining the composition and structure of materials on the nanometer scale. Characterization of atomic, meso-, and microstructure of materials including impurities and defects. Major topics will include electron microscopy (transmission, scanning, and Auger) and associated spectroscopies (EDX, EELS), surface sensitive spectroscopies (e.g., XPS, AES, IR) and spectrometry (SIMS), synchrotron techniques, X-ray absorption, fluorescence and emission, and scanned probe microscopies (AFM, STM, etc.). The strengths, weaknesses, and complementarity of the techniques used will be examined via case studies on the characterization of real-world nanotechnologies, such as heterogeneous catalysts, surfaces and interfaces in semiconductor devices, organic monolayers on metals and semiconductors, nanotube- and nanowire- based electronics, and biocompatible materials. Prerequisite: 4th year standing or consent of instructor.
CHEM 461 Qualitative Organic Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-4). Introductory discussion of the physical techniques used in organic chemistry research for the separation/purification and structural elucidation of organic compounds. Emphasis is on the combined use of modern spectrometric techniques for structure determination, with particular focus on an introduction to modern NMR spectroscopy. Prerequisite: CHEM 363 or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 462 Physical Organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Discussion of organic structural theories, intramolecular and intermolecular interactions in organic chemistry, and the mechanisms and reactive intermediates involved in organic reactions. Prerequisite: CHEM 363 or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 463 Organic Synthesis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Discussion of the different concepts of chemoselective, regioselective and stereoselective reactions of organic compounds. Main classes of reactions described are oxidations, reductions, functional group protection, and carbon-carbon bond formation methods for single, double, and triple bonds. Emphasis on modern methodology for organic synthesis, including asymmetric catalysis and transition-metal catalyzed methods such as cross-coupling chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 363 or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 464 Bioconjugate Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of organic reactions to modify or label biopolymers including proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. Topics will include mechanistic and methodological details of commonly employed reactions used for chemoselective labeling or modification of biomolecules to produce synthetic bioconjugates. Applications including synthetic vaccines, antibody-drug conjugates, and native chemical ligation will be discussed. Prerequisites: CHEM 361 and BIOCH 200, or consent of instructor.
CHEM 477 Molecular Symmetry and Spectroscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of the principles of molecular symmetry to molecular properties. Topics include group theory with emphasis on vibrational motion and normal vibrations; quantum mechanics of vibration and rotation; magnetic resonance spectroscopy; perturbation methods; selection rules in rotational, infrared, and Raman spectroscopy; molecular symmetry and molecular orbitals; electronic spectroscopy of polyatomic molecules. Prerequisite: CHEM 383; or CHEM 282 and CHEM 298 and one 300-level Chemistry course; or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 479 Molecular Kinetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Rate laws for simple and complex reactions, reaction mechanisms, potential energy surfaces, molecular dynamics, theories of reaction rates, catalysis, with application to gas and liquid phase reactions, photochemical reactions in chemistry and biology, and enzyme catalysis. Prerequisites: CHEM 273 or CHEM 373; MATH 215, PHYS 230, and a 300-level Chemistry course.
CHEM 493 Computational Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). The focus is on applications in this course which introduces the student to contemporary computational quantum chemistry (Hartree-Fock, post-Hartree-Fock, and density functional theory methods), using the state of-the-art computer code GAMESS-US running on UNIX workstations and computer servers. Elementary introduction to the UNIX operating system is given. Subjects include: basis sets; optimization of molecular geometry; prediction of molecular properties; calculation of infra-red and Raman spectra; excited electronic states; solvent effects; computational thermochemistry; mechanisms of chemical reactions; visualization of results. Assignments in the course allow the student to acquire practical computational experience that relates to chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 383 or CHEM 282 and one 300-level chemistry course or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 495 Molecular Dynamics and its Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to Molecular Dynamics and its applications. The fundamentals of statistical mechanics are reviewed and computational tools such as molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo methods are presented. Applications include the study of structural properties of liquids, the diffusion of a solute in a solvent, the dynamics of proton transfer, and the calculation of rate constants. These topics will be exemplified using computer simulations as problem set assignments. Some lectures will take place in the computer laboratory where visualization tools will be used to illustrate various applications of molecular dynamics. Prerequisite: CHEM 282 and one 300-level CHEM course; or CHEM 383; or consent of the instructor.
Graduate Courses
CHEM 502 Departmental Research Seminar Œ0 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Course may be repeated.
CHEM 511 Biomolecular Chemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include: biomolecule structure and function, enzymology, molecular biology, protein engineering, bioconjugate chemistry, bioinformatics and molecular visualization. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 419.
CHEM 512 Optical Spectroscopy Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course on optical spectroscopy. Topics may include electromagnetic spectrum, transitions and selection rules, instrumentation, atomic spectroscopy, molecular absorption, fluorescence, vibrational spectroscopy, applications of optical spectroscopy. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 424.
CHEM 514 Electrochemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course on electrochemistry. Topics may include electrochemical potentials, junction potentials, interfaces, potentiometry/ ion selective electrodes, kinetics, electron transport theory, mass transport, voltammetry, microelectrodes, solid electrodes. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 424.
CHEM 516 Separations Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course on separations with topics that may include LC, GC, intermolecular forces, retention mechanisms, gradient elution, separation optimization, band broadening, HPLC modes-reversed phase, size exclusion, ion exchange, HILIC. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 425.
CHEM 518 Mass Spectrometry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course on mass spectrometry with topics that may include mass analyzers, sample introduction techniques, ionization techniques, ion detection and data systems, applications. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 425.
CHEM 519 Bioanalytical Chemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include antibodies, immunoassays, surface plasmon resonance, biosensors, gel electrophoresis, DNA sequencing, microscopy and imaging. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 419.
CHEM 534 X-ray Crystallography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to structure determination by single-crystal X-ray diffraction methods. Topics include X-ray diffraction, crystal symmetry, experimental methods, structure solution, refinement, crystallographic software, and interpretation of crystal structure data. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 433 or 434.
CHEM 536 Synthesis and Applications of Inorganic and Nano-materials Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to methods of synthesizing inorganic materials with control of atomic, meso-, and micro-structure. Topics include sol-gel chemistry, chemical vapor deposition, solid-state reactions, solid-state metathesis and high-temperature self-propagating reactions, template-directed syntheses of micro and mesoporous materials, micelles and colloids, synthesis of nanoparticles and nanomaterials. Applications of these synthetic techniques to applications such as photonic materials, heterogeneous catalysts, magnetic data storage media, nanoelectronics, display technologies, alternative energy technologies, and composite materials will be discussed. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 436.
CHEM 537 Transition Metal Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Graduate level course on organotransition metal chemistry. The course will deal with the synthesis, bonding, and reactivity of organotransition metal complexes. Topics to be covered include transition metal complexes of hydrides, phosphines, carbonyls, olefins, alkynes, polyolefins, cyclopentadienyl and related cyclic pi-ligands; metal-carbon sigma- and multiple bonds. The application of these complexes to homogeneous catalysis and to organic syntheses will be discussed when appropriate. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 437.
CHEM 538 Solid State Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the chemistry of extended inorganic solids. The topics covered include synthesis, symmetry, descriptive crystal chemistry, bonding, electronic band structures, characterization techniques, and phase diagrams. The correlation of structure with properties of electronic and magnetic materials will be discussed. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 438.
CHEM 543 Asymmetric Catalysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory course on asymmetric catalysis. Emphasis will be on reactions catalyzed by chiral transition metal complexes, but non-metal catalyzed reactions and heterogeneous catalysis will be covered. Topics include the general principles of catalysis; mechanisms of common steps in catalytic cycles; rapid pre-equilibrium and steady-state kinetic treatments of catalytic rates; the origins of catalytic selection; and the strategies and principles of new catalyst, ligand, and reaction development. The course will include a survey of common enantioselective catalytic reactions and daily examples from ASAP articles that illustrate the principles and theories being taught in the course. Introductory level knowledge of transition metal and organic chemistry is required. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 443 or 533.
CHEM 544 Characterization Methods in Nanoscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to techniques in determining the composition and structure of materials on the nanometer scale. Characterization of atomic, meso-, and micro-structure of materials including impurities and defects. Major topics will include electron microscopy (transmission, scanning, and Auger) and associated spectroscopies (EDX, EELS), surface sensitive spectroscopies (e.g., XPS, AES, IR) and spectrometry (SIMS), synchrotron techniques, X-ray absorption, fluorescence and emission, and scanned probe microscopies (AFM, STM, etc.). The techniques will be examined through real-world nanotechnology case studies. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 444.
CHEM 545 Special Topics in Inorganic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CHEM 561 Qualitative Organic Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-4). Introductory graduate-level discussion of the physical techniques used in organic chemistry research for the separation/purification and structural elucidation of organic compounds. Emphasis is on the combined use of modern spectrometric techniques for structure determination, with particular focus on an introduction to modern one- and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy. There is a laboratory component to this course. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 461.
CHEM 562 Physical Organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Graduate-level discussion of organic structural theories, intramolecular and intermolecular interactions in organic chemistry, and the mechanisms and reactive intermediates involved in organic reactions. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 462 or 465.
CHEM 563 Organic Synthesis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Graduate-level discussion of the different concepts of chemoselective, regioselective and stereoselective reactions of organic compounds. Main classes of reactions described are oxidations, reductions, functional group protection, and carbon-carbon bond formation methods for single, double, and triple bonds. Emphasis on modern methodology for organic synthesis, including asymmetric catalysis and transition-metal catalyzed methods such as cross-coupling chemistry. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 463 or 467.
CHEM 564 Bioconjugate Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Graduate-level discussion of organic reactions to modify or label biopolymers including proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. Topics will include mechanistic and methodological details of commonly employed reactions used for chemoselective labeling or modification of biomolecules to produce synthetic bioconjugates. Applications including synthetic vaccines, antibody- drug conjugates, and native chemical ligation will be discussed. Prerequisite: 1 year of introductory organic chemistry and 1 term of biochemistry, or consent of instructor. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 464.
CHEM 577 Molecular Symmetry and Spectroscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of the principles of molecular symmetry to molecular properties. Topics include group theory with emphasis on vibrational motion and normal vibrations; quantum mechanics of vibration and rotation; magnetic resonance spectroscopy; perturbation methods; selection rules in rotational, infrared, and Raman spectroscopy; molecular symmetry and molecular orbitals; electronic spectroscopy of polyatomic molecules. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 477.
CHEM 579 Molecular Kinetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Rate laws: for simple and complex reactions, reaction mechanisms, potential energy surfaces, molecular dynamics, theories of reaction rates, catalysis, with application to gas and liquid phase reactions, photochemical reactions in chemistry and biology, and enzyme catalysis. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 479.
CHEM 593 Computational Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). The focus is on applications in this course which introduces the student to contemporary computational quantum chemistry (Hartree-Fock, post-Hartree-Fock, and density functional theory methods), using the state-of-the-art computer code GAMESS-US running on UNIX workstations and computer servers. Elementary introduction to the UNIX operating system is given. Subjects include: basis sets; optimization of molecular geometry; prediction of molecular properties; calculation of infra-red and Raman spectra; excited electronic states; solvent effects; computational thermochemistry; mechanisms of chemical reactions; visualization of results. Assignments in the course allow the student to acquire practical experience that relates to chemistry. Term projects focus on chemistry related to student’s research area. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 493.
CHEM 595 Molecular Dynamics and its Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to Molecular Dynamics and its applications. The fundamentals of statistical mechanics are reviewed and computational tools such as molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo methods are presented. Applications include the study of structural properties of liquids, the diffusion of a solute in a solvent, the dynamics of proton transfer, and the calculation of rate constants. These topics will be exemplified using computer simulations as problem set assignments. Some lectures will take place in the computer laboratory where visualization tools will be used to illustrate various applications of molecular dynamics. Not open to students with credit in CHEM 495.
CHEM 612 Advanced Optical Spectroscopy Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include: sources, wavelength analyzers, interferometers, detectors, signal/noise, signal processing, advanced Raman spectroscopy, single molecule fluorescence and fluorescence imaging, Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Prerequisite: CHEM 512.
CHEM 614 Advanced Electrochemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include: CV and chemical reactions, microelectrode applications, carbon electrodes, modified electrode surfaces, micro-fabricated sensors, scanning probe microscopy, spectroelectrochemistry, rotating disk electrochemistry, AC voltammetry. Prerequisite: CHEM 514.
CHEM 616 Advanced Separations Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include: multidimensional separations, ion chromatography, CE, biological HPLC, advanced sample preparation/introduction techniques. Prerequisite: CHEM 516.
CHEM 618 Advanced Mass Spectrometry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3/2-0-0). Six week course with topics that may include: mass analyzers and ionization techniques, vacuum systems, advanced sample introduction techniques, tandem MS, mass spectral interpretation, quantitative MS, MS applications. Prerequisite: CHEM 518.
CHEM 623 Special Topics in Advanced Analytical Chemistry Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 3/2-0-0). Course may be repeated for credit, provided there is no duplication of specific topic.
CHEM 667 Special Topics in Synthetic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced treatment of selected topics in modern synthetic organic chemistry, drawn from one or more of the following: (1) advanced methodology for organic synthesis, (2) carbohydrate structure and synthesis, (3) organometallic methodology for organic synthesis, and (4) solid-phase organic synthesis and combinatorial chemistry. Other topics appropriate to the category may also be offered. Course may be repeated for credit, provided there is no duplication of specific topic. Prerequisite: CHEM 563 or consent of Instructor.
CHEM 669 Special Topics in Bio-organic Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced discussion of selected topics in modern bio-organic chemistry, drawn from one or more of the following: (1) natural products and secondary metabolism, (2) nucleic acid chemistry, and (3) organic and biophysical carbohydrate chemistry. Other topics appropriate to the category may also be offered. Course may be repeated for credit, provided there is no duplication of specific topic.
CHEM 681 Special Topics in Physical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Course may be repeated for credit, provided there is no duplication of specific topic.
#
Chinese
CHINA
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with an Asian (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course suitable to their level of ability or they may be encouraged to seek “Credit by Special Assessment” (see Classics) when appropriate.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level courses, credit may be withheld.
CHINA 101 Basic Chinese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A non-intensive introduction to Mandarin Chinese. Note: Not open to students with matriculation in Chinese, i.e., CHINA 30 or equivalent.
CHINA 102 Basic Chinese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of CHINA 101. Prerequisite: CHINA 101. Note: Not open to students with matriculation in Chinese, i.e., CHINA 30 or equivalent.
CHINA 201 Basic Chinese III =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of CHINA 102. Designed to develop further basic skills in spoken and written Chinese. Prerequisite: CHINA 102.
CHINA 202 Basic Chinese IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of CHINA 201. Designed to develop further basic skills in spoken and written Chinese. Prerequisite: CHINA 201.
CHINA 211 Mandarin Chinese I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Designed for speakers proficient in one of the regional dialects of Chinese to gain fluency and literacy in standard Mandarin.
CHINA 212 Mandarin Chinese II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: CHINA 211.
CHINA 301 Intermediate Chinese I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Continuing study of spoken and written modem standard Chinese. Conversation and composition are integrated with reading and discussion of texts of modem Chinese prose, fiction, and other kinds of writing. Prerequisite: CHINA 202 and 208, or consent of Department.
CHINA 302 Intermediate Chinese II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). A continuation of CHINA 301. Prerequisite: CHINA 301 or consent of Department.
CHINA 341 Classical Chinese I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the syntax and semantic structures of classical Chinese. Prerequisite: CHINA 200 or 202.
CHINA 342 Classical Chinese II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A continuation of CHINA 341. Prerequisite: CHINA 341.
CHINA 401 Advanced Chinese I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of language skills through contemporary film, television programs and newspapers. Prerequisite: CHINA 302 or consent of Department.
CHINA 402 Advanced Chinese II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development of language skills through reading modern fiction and/or non-fiction. Readings in Chinese. Prerequisite: CHINA 401 or consent of Department.
CHINA 407 Advanced Readings in Modern Chinese Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced readings from newspapers, magazines, social commentary and/or literary prose. Prerequisite: CHINA 302 or consent of Department.
CHINA 428 Chinese-English Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice in translation as applied to Chinese and English literary and non-literary texts. Prerequisite: CHINA 240 and 302 or consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
CHINA 500 Topics in Chinese Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A reading knowledge of Chinese is required.
CHINA 501 Methods of Research: Pre-Modern Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sinology; historical and critical approaches to pre- modern Chinese literature. A reading knowledge of Chinese is required.
CHINA 502 Methods of Research: Modern Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sinology; historical and critical approaches to modern Chinese literature. A reading knowledge of Chinese is required.
CHINA 510 Reading Tang-Song Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Conventions of writing poetry in China in contrast to those in the western world.
CHINA 599 Topics in Chinese Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of major topics in Chinese literature, pre-modern and modern. CHINA 599 must be taken at least once and may be repeated for credit when course content differs. A reading knowledge of Chinese is required.
#
Christian Theology at St Joseph’s College
CHRTC
St Joseph’s College
Note: The following courses can be used as Arts options.
Undergraduate Courses
CHRTC 100 The Bible: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history and theology of the Old Testament and New Testament.
CHRTC 101 Catholicism: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Catholic Christianity - its history, institutions, rituals and theology.
CHRTC 103 Introduction to the Roads of Happiness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A practical theological approach to happiness utilizing practices which critically engage psychological and spiritual wisdom.
CHRTC 203 Topics in the Catholic Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CHRTC 220 Sport and Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An investigation into past and contemporary interplay between sport and religion from a Christian perspective.
CHRTC 221 Interactions between Indigenous Spiritual Traditions and Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of cross-cultural issues focusing on indigenous spiritual traditions and Christianity in Canada.
CHRTC 241 Catholicism and Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between Catholicism and popular culture using both historical and contemporary examples. Use by Catholics of such popular media as print, film, video, TV, music and the internet; Catholic assessments of consumer culture and the mass media. Not to be taken by students with credit in CHRTC 392.
CHRTC 242 The Writings of C.S. Lewis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of the 20th century Christian writer C.S. Lewis, focusing on his articulation of faith and reason in representative works such as The Screwtape Letters, The Chronicles of Narnia, and Mere Christianity.
CHRTC 250 The Theological Education of the Catholic Teacher Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The components that make up the education of the Catholic teacher. Issues include credal statements, the moral and social teachings of the Church, liturgical practices, a general theology and theory of Catholic education.
CHRTC 264 Dimensions of the Christian Faith Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). What is Christianity? An introduction to the major dimensions of Christianity, such as revelation, faith, Scripture, God, Jesus as Lord and Saviour, with reflection on them in light of contemporary human experience. Formerly CHRTC 364.
CHRTC 266 Jesus in the New Testament Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the historical Jesus and Christology through a study of the four Gospels, Paul, and later New Testament writers.
CHRTC 267 The New Testament Letters: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A theological and scriptural exploration of the central themes of the New Testament letters and their contemporary relevance.
CHRTC 272 Catholic Moral Thought: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major themes in Catholic moral reflection with application to contemporary issues. The meaning of morality and Christian conversion: the role of experience, the Bible, the Church, moral norms, the development of conscience, and personal responsibility. Not open to students with credit in CHRTC 172.
CHRTC 292 Spirituality for Today’s Christians Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Developing an understanding of the role of prayer, leisure, and work within a Christian lifestyle in the light of Scripture, Christian tradition, current theological reflection, and personal differences.
CHRTC 309 Topics in the Christian Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CHRTC 339 International Service Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Supervised international work experience in selected Christian social agencies. Evaluation based on experience and seminars. Prerequisite: Consent of the College.
CHRTC 341 Contemporary Film and Christian Values Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theological themes arising out of contemporary film. Themes may include relationships, family, gender, possessions, work freedom, violence, suffering, death, happiness, and hope.
CHRTC 342 Tolkien: The Theology of Middle Earth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of J.R.R. Tolkien’s writings on the world of Middle Earth as they relate to his Catholic faith. This course seeks to critically appreciate the artistic vocation and theological vision of J.R.R. Tolkien while exploring a major work of 20th century literature.
CHRTC 347 World War II and Christians Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An investigation of Christian responses to World War II through the actions, experiences and thoughts of individuals and churches.
CHRTC 348 A History of Christianity in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CHRTC 349 Social Justice and Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of particular social justice issues related to the economy, women, native peoples, the environment, etc., in light of Catholic social teachings and other Christian perspectives; social action strategies, and education for social justice.
CHRTC 350 Science and Religion: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of relationships between science and religion. Topics may include Galileo affair, geology and Noah’s flood, Darwin’s religious beliefs, evolution vs creation debate, intelligent design, natural evil, interpretations of Genesis 1-11.
CHRTC 351 Sex, Love and Marriage: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Questions of meaning and morality concerning sex, love, marriage, non-marital sex, parenthood, relationship and marriage breakup, celibacy, gender, and homosexuality, considered in the light of experience, the Bible, Catholic teaching, traditional and contemporary theological discussion.
CHRTC 352 Bioethical Issues: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reproductive and genetic technologies, abortion, transplantation, resource allocation, research, withdrawing treatment, personal directives, euthanasia, considered in light of human experience. Catholic Church teaching, other Christian perspectives and contemporary ethical discussion.
CHRTC 354 The Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and theological accounts of Jesus in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke.
CHRTC 355 The Catechism of the Catholic Church: Theological Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scripture, the moral life, systematic theology, social teachings, catechesis, the spiritual life in the Catechism. The relationship between the Catechism and Catholic theological development.
CHRTC 358 The Gospel and Epistles of John Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The sources, historical setting, content, and theology of the Gospel and Epistles of John.
CHRTC 361 Death, Dying and Culture: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Facets of death and dying as they manifest in the Christian tradition and contemporary culture. Topics may include: faith and death, ritual, spiritual practices, caring for the dying, allowing to die, assisting in death, medical perceptions of death, social responses to death/dying, grief and mourning.
CHRTC 372 The Theology and Spirituality of Eastern Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The churches of the Christian East, the Patristic era and early ecumenical councils, the schism between East and West, and contemporary Greek Catholic and Orthodox Churches with special attention to the churches in Canada.
CHRTC 380 Teaching Religion: Elementary Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to Christian religious education for elementary schools with an emphasis on pedagogy, child development and the religious education curriculum.
CHRTC 381 Teaching Religion: Secondary Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to Christian religious education for secondary schools with an emphasis on pedagogy, adolescent and young adult development and the religious education curriculum.
CHRTC 390 Neuroscience, the Person and Christian Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interdisciplinary study of personhood and related topics: animal/human consciousness; body/soul, mind/brain, sexuality/gender, and relationship issues; religious and mystical experiences.
CHRTC 391 Women’s Spirituality in Contemporary Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Women’s experience of God and the Christian life expressed in the history of spirituality, personal faith development and contemporary culture.
CHRTC 394 Business Ethics: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A theological study of ethical issues in business settings, dealing with such themes as employer-employee relations, job security, advertising, distribution of wealth, acquisitive individualism, the common good; decisions on ethical issues in light of contemporary Catholic teaching.
CHRTC 396 Environmental Issues: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theological and ethical issues concerning our relationship to the planet earth: responsible stewardship, non-renewable resources, pollution, the use of technology.
CHRTC 407 Topics in Christian Religious Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: CHRTC 380 or 381 or consent of the College.
CHRTC 430 The Human Sexual Body: Christian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and contemporary perspectives on the sexual body in Christian thought. Not to be taken by students with credit in CHRTC 393.
CHRTC 432 Current Theological Issues in Advanced Bioethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: CHRTC 352 or consent of the College.
CHRTC 449 Field Placement in Christian Service Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-8s-0). Supervised work experience in approved Christian social agencies with seminars and a major paper integrating the theological literature with issues raised by social action and placement experiences. Prerequisite: CHRTC 349 or consent of the College.
CHRTC 450 Directed Readings in Catholic Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An intensive directed readings course on a topic selected by the student in consultation with one of the faculty. A major term paper is required. Prerequisites: One course in Christian theology and permission of the College.
Graduate Courses
CHRTC 501 Directed Reading in Catholic Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of College.
CHRTC 609 Topics in Christian Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Christian Theology at St Stephen’s College
CHRTP
St Stephen’s College
Note: The following courses can be used as Arts options.
Undergraduate Courses
CHRTP 117 New Issues in Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Developments and controversies in contemporary theology and their implications for faith and practice. Not open to students with credit in CHRTP 317.
CHRTP 305 Scripture as Story Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how the elements of story employed by the Gospel writers and editors shaped their understanding of the person of Jesus and his followers.
CHRTP 311 Spirituality and the Arts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Explores how the Sacred is experienced and expressed through the visual arts, music and dance.
CHRTP 312 Questing Faith: Thinking About God =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Explores major questions of faith: God, Christ, humanity, evil, hope. This course provides insight into the Christian faith for all interested persons.
CHRTP 315 Pop Culture and Theology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Considering theological themes in movies, poetry, fiction, and graphic novels that echo lived experiences.
CHRTP 321 Art Therapy Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). Art therapy, a specialized field in counseling psychology, provides a natural vehicle for promoting integrative, holistic approach to psychological healing. Explores the theory and application of art therapy to spirituality and healing settings. This course will be experientially based, with a lecture and seminar portion.
CHRTP 330 Mindfulness for Teachers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores contemplative/meditative practices that foster calm, concentration, and insight for teachers and their students.
CHRTP 381 Introduction to Music Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). Introduction to the discipline of music therapy: physical, mental, social, emotional, and spiritual applications of music.
CHRTP 382 Introduction to Drama Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). Explores the role of drama therapy in health and spirituality: masks, puppets, theatre games, improvisation, role-play, playback theatre, and psychodrama in various therapeutic settings.
CHRTP 383 Psychotherapy and Spirituality: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). Explores the theory and practice of psychotherapy, pastoral counseling, and spiritual care: therapeutic work, current theory, personal reflection, and group process.
CHRTP 400 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). Discussion of topics relevant to the theological or pastoral counselling disciplines. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once.
CHRTP 411 Independent Study in Theology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3s-0). Directed reading or research in a chosen area of theology.
Graduate Courses
CHRTP 511 Independent Study in Theology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3s-0). Directed reading or research in a chosen area of theology.
CHRTP 521 Art Therapy: The Artful-Spiritual Connection =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-2s-0). History and ethics of art therapy, incorporating introductory art therapy techniques and theological reflection.
CHRTP 523 Jungian Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Psychotherapeutic process and spirituality is explored in the context of Jungian analytic thought.
CHRTP 553 Metaphor in the Arts and Spirituality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0).
CHRTP 771 Inquiry, Evaluation and Search for Knowledge =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Considering the basic elements of knowledge generation through the insights of theology and spirituality.
#
Civil Engineering
CIV E
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
CIV E 221 Environmental Engineering Fundamentals Œ3.8 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Basic mechanisms of chemistry, biology, and physics relevant to environmental engineering processes. Principles of equilibrium reactions and kinetics, mass transfer and material balances, microbial growth and kinetics, water, energy, and nutrient cycles. Applications to environmental engineering systems as biological degradation, mass and energy movement through the environment, and design of water and wastewater treatment systems. Prerequisites: CHEM 103 and CHEM 105.
CIV E 240 Technical Communications Œ2 (fi 8) (second term, 1-2s-0). Written and oral communications in civil engineering; lectures and practice on presentation of oral and written reports, including technical proposals; progress reports; field inspection reports; consulting reports; and coverage of elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Seminars and practice in developing effective search strategies for technical information. A written report must be submitted by each student.
CIV E 250 Plane Surveying Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Basic surveying concepts and instrumentation, measurement errors, coordinate systems, leveling, traversing, layout surveys, earthwork volumes, conventional, and digital mapping, GIS concepts, aerial photography, and GPS. Prerequisites: MATH 101 and 102.
CIV E 251 Survey School Œ1.5 (fi 4) (second term or Spring/Summer, 1 week). Practical exercises in field methods; project type of assignments; field astronomy; electronic distance measuring instruments. Note: Survey School is held off campus. Prerequisite: CIV E 250.
CIV E 265 Engineering Drawing and Computer Graphics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 2-0-3). Multiview representation, pictorial views of three- dimensional objects. Computer-aided graphics using AutoCAD.
CIV E 270 Mechanics of Deformable Bodies I Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Plane stress and strain; stress- strain relationships; stresses and deformations resulting from axial and transverse loads; buckling of columns; torsion of circular sections; combined stress; statically indeterminate problems. Laboratory to demonstrate mechanical properties and verify assumptions of analysis. Prerequisites: ENGG 130 and MATH 101.
CIV E 290 Civil Engineering Analysis I Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-0). Statistical and probabilistic approaches to civil engineering problems. Prerequisite: MATH 101.
CIV E 295 Civil Engineering Analysis II Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-2). Application of numerical methods to civil engineering problems. Prerequisites: ENCMP 100 and MATH 102.
CIV E 303 Project Management Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Planning and scheduling; theories and techniques of project management.
CIV E 315 Transportation Engineering Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-2). Transportation systems and their elements. Principles of transportation planning. Traffic volume, capacity, speed, density, and safety. Fundamentals of traffic control. Principles of highway planning. Highway and terrain. Vehicular motion. Horizontal and vertical geometric design. Cost/benefit analysis in highway design. Earthwork and mass diagram. Flexible and rigid pavement design. Prerequisite: CIV E 250.
CIV E 321 Principles of Environmental Modeling and Risk Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction modeling environmental processes to predict the movement of water and fate of contaminants in the hydrologic cycle. Principles of mass transfer, conservation of mass, environmental transformations, nutrient enrichment and depletion are developed. Introduction to storm events, rainfall, runoff, stream discharge and stormwater management. Applications of modeling results to the quantification of risk using examples from hydrology, water pollution and health protection and development of environmental regulations. Prerequisite: CIV E 221. Corequisite: CIV E 330.
CIV E 330 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Fluid properties; dimensional analysis; hydrostatics; fundamental equations of fluid motion; laminar, turbulent and inviscid flows; boundary layers and flow around immersed bodies; elementary building aerodynamics. Prerequisite: MATH 209. Corequisite: MATH 201.
CIV E 331 Applied Hydraulics Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to applied hydraulics; control volume methods, open channel hydraulics, pipe systems, pumps, distribution and collection system hydraulics and design. Prerequisite: CIV E 330. Corequisite: either CIV E 221 or ENV E 325.
CIV E 372 Structural Analysis I Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3-2s-0). Introduction to structural loads; deformations of statically determinate beams, trusses and frames; influence lines; analysis of statically indeterminate structures by consistent deformations, slope deflection and moment distribution; direct stiffness analysis. Prerequisite: CIV E 270.
CIV E 374 Structural Design I Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to limit states design. Behavior and design of steel and reinforced concrete members. Prerequisite: CIV E 372.
CIV E 381 Soil Mechanics Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Compaction; site investigation; theories of water seepage; effective stress principles; settlement; strength and mechanical properties; introduction to retaining structures, foundation, and slope stability. Prerequisite: EAS 210.
CIV E 391 Civil Engineering Materials Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Classification of soils. Properties of Portland cement concrete related to micro- and macro-structure and constituent materials. Properties of bituminous materials and design of bituminous mixes. Prerequisite: MAT E 202 or ENV E 220.
CIV E 395 Civil Engineering Analysis III Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-2/2). The formulation of partial differential equations for modeling civil engineering problems. Introduction to analytical and numerical solution techniques. Prerequisites: MATH 201, MATH 209 and CIV E 295.
CIV E 398 Introduction to Continuum Mechanics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (first term, 3-1s-0). Stress, strain and displacements in two and three dimensions. Constitutive equations. Governing equations of elasticity and simple solutions. Strain energy and virtual work. Theories of failure. Prerequisites: CIV E 270 and MATH 209.
CIV E 406 Construction Estimating, Planning, and Control Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to elements of construction, planning, scheduling, and cost estimating. Familiarization with quantity take-off, estimate preparation, cost recovery, resource allocation, project scheduling, risk analysis, and bid preparation. Prerequisite: CIV E 303.
CIV E 409 Construction Methods Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Principles of building, heavy and bridge construction; wood and formwork design, stability during construction, economics of equipment selection, movement of material on construction sites, safety, and constructability issues. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisites: CIV E 303 and 372. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students, or by consent of the Department.
CIV E 411 Transportation Engineering II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Traffic operations and network analysis, traffic stream flow and roadway analysis, weaving and interchange ramp analysis, intersection traffic control measures and control design, progressive signal system design, traffic flow prediction, road network simulation and assignment algorithms, motor vehicle accident analysis; and field data collection method. Prerequisite: CIV E 315.
CIV E 419 Transportation Engineering: Highway Planning and Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Planning and design of highway transportation systems, including development, planning process, data collection, procedures for future developments, evaluation of transportation plans, and design of highway transportation facilities. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisite: CIV E 411. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 429 Environmental Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Fundamentals of municipal planning and design of water supply, water and wastewater treatment, storm water management, or wastewater collection and management systems. Course includes design projects, field trips, and presentations. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisites: CIV E 321 and ENV E 421. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 431 Water Resources Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Hydrotechnical analysis, including: advanced open channel hydraulics; advanced surface water hydrology; groundwater and well hydraulics; and environmental hydraulics. Prerequisites: CIV E 321, 331.
CIV E 439 Water Resources Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Design of hydraulic structures and river engineering works, including: dams, spillways, energy dissipators, bridges, culverts, erosion protection and river training works. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisite: CIV E 431. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 459 Biomedical Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Application of civil and mechanical engineering principles to different topics in biomechanical engineering design. Topics may include: experimental tissues, bone engineering, computational biomechanics, numerical modeling for different mechanical and biological processes. Students work in teams on a design project. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 474 Structural Design II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Behavior and design of steel and reinforced concrete structures. This course builds on the material presented in CIV E 374 and places greater emphasis on the behavior of overall structures. Prerequisite: CIV E 374.
CIV E 479 Structural Design III Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Design of prestressed concrete structures; masonry and reinforced masonry elements; timber structures; fatigue life of steel structures and cold formed steel elements. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisite: CIV E 474. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 481 Soil Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Site investigation; strength of soils; geosynthetics for soil improvement; design of excavations and earth pressures on retaining structures; stability of natural slopes and their improvement; design of cuts and embankments; foundation design, stability and settlement; pile foundations; frost action and permafrost. Prerequisite: CIV E 381.
CIV E 489 Geotechnical Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3). Evaluation of site conditions. Design and analysis of shallow and deep foundations and retaining structures. Slope stability of embankments and cuts including foundation excavations. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisite: CIV E 481. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
CIV E 499 Special Topics in Civil Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3).
Graduate Courses
CIV E 524 Environmental Biotechnology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Use of microbial systems for bioremediation and energy production; study microorganisms as environmental contaminants. Study microbiological concepts and practices particularly related to environmental engineering and science. Discussion of new technologies and genomic approaches that can be applied to enhance efficiency and productivity of biological processes and solve environmental problems. Prerequisite: ENV E 324 or consent of instructor.
CIV E 526 Soil Remediation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Identification of regulations and guidelines applicable to contaminated site assessment and remediation. Review of soil and contaminant properties that affect contaminant partitioning and movement in subsurface soils. Study of physical, chemical and biological treatment methods for the remediation of contaminated soils.
CIV E 601 Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of project management for capital construction projects. Emphasis on planning and scheduling, including linear scheduling, project control, value engineering, and constructability.
CIV E 602 Contract Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Construction project and contract administration; budgeting, costing and financial project control; delivery systems; labour relations; safety.
CIV E 603 Construction Informatics Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Computer-aided information management in construction, including relational database development and management, application of data mining techniques, computer programming, and application of computers in the planning, organization and control of construction projects.
CIV E 604 Construction Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers fundamentals of construction law; overview of the Canadian Legal System, business organization. Tort liability, construction contracts, agreements. Lien legislation, statutes governing the engineering profession and other legal topics.
CIV E 605 Decision Support Systems in Construction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Modeling construction related problems utilizing mathematical and optimization algorithms. Decision analysis, multi-criteria decision making tools including analytic hierarchy process, multi-attribute utility theory, goal programming and multi-objective optimization forecasting, and queuing theory.
CIV E 606 Design and Analysis of Construction Operations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of production management in construction. Techniques for modeling construction operations, design of efficient processes, measurement and improvement of productivity. Computer simulation techniques for modeling and analysis.
CIV E 607 Work Improvement Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Planning for productivity improvement, work measurement technique, data analysis and evaluation, human behavior as a factor in construction productivity, safety in productivity improvement, computer and other tools for productivity improvement.
CIV E 608 Construction Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the elements and methods of construction and principles of material handling on construction projects. Winter construction, dewatering, earthmoving and earthworks, concrete processes, building systems and lifting.
CIV E 609 Underground Trenchless Construction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to underground pipeline infrastructure. Focus on pipeline condition assessment. New construction such as horizontal directional drilling, pilot tube microtunneling, pipe bursting, and pipe jacking. Rehabilitation methods such as cured in place pipe lining, geotechnical consideration. Risk considerations for underground projects.
CIV E 612 Transportation Planning: Methodology and Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction and overview of transportation planning. Institutional framework of transportation planning. Characteristics of urban travel, trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice, trip assignment, urban activity system. Transportation supply, transportation system impact analysis, evaluation process and methods. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
CIV E 613 Transportation Systems and Demand Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Microeconomic principles of production and consumer behaviour. Econometric modeling of demand: parameter estimation techniques, disaggregate choice theory, sampling and data preparation, evaluation. Networks, economic evaluations. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
CIV E 614 Traffic Operation and Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Human factors, traffic control devices, signal warrants, principles of signalized intersections, signal timing, signal optimization and coordination, capacity, traffic delay, left turn, diamond interchange, unsignalized intersection, roundabouts, actuated control, incident management, freeway control.
CIV E 615 Traffic Flow and Network Modeling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Traffic flow stream characteristics, car following model, continuum flow model, fundamental diagram, microscopic traffic simulation, macroscopic traffic flow modeling, model parameter calibration, route choice concept and model, static traffic network modeling, dynamic traffic network modeling.
CIV E 616 Traffic Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to traffic safety. Focus on collisions and exposure. Safety management process. Collision modeling, theory and applications. Safety evaluation techniques, challenges, opportunities, influence of confounding factors and regression to the mean bias.
CIV E 617 Highway Geometric Design Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles and process of highway geometric design. Alignment and cross section elements, design of at-grade intersection, local roads and roadside features. Application of current road geometric design guidelines in Canada and Alberta. Examination of trade-offs between performance, costs and impacts. Highlight new and evolving geometric design concepts and the latest research findings. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
CIV E 618 Pavement Management Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to pavement management, network and project level management, data collection and management, pavement evaluation, pavement design, rehabilitation and maintenance, pavement performance models, life cycle analysis, implementation of pavement management systems, future directions and research needs.
CIV E 620 Environmental Engineering Measurements I Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory and procedures for determining the quality of natural water, potable water, municipal and industrial wastes. Fundamental parameters and concepts for environmental quality evaluation.
CIV E 622 Physical/Chemical Water and Wastewater Treatment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and design of chemical and physical unit processes utilized in the treatment of water and wastewater, sedimentation, flotation, coagulation, precipitation, filtration, disinfection, ion exchange, reverse osmosis, adsorption, and gas transfer.
CIV E 623 Industrial Water and Wastewater Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Industrial water quantity and quality requirements. Characteristics of wastes, inplant controls, product recovery; effluent characteristics, chemical and toxic properties, pretreatment and treatment design theory and methodology, water reclamation and reuse regulations.
CIV E 624 Biological Waste Treatment Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the theoretical and applied aspects of wastewater treatment by activated sludge, fixed and moving biological films, conventional and aerated lagoons, sludge digestion, septic tanks, land treatment, and nutrient removal. Guidelines, regulations and economics. System analysis and design of facilities.
CIV E 625 Engineering Management of Water Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Concepts, rationale, theory, institutions and engineering aspects of water quality management. Methods of water quality management; oxygen; chemical and microbial models, natural and induced re-aeration techniques; thermal pollution and ice cover considerations.
CIV E 627 Environmental Engineering Measurements II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-4). Laboratory experiments to present techniques for obtaining data and relationships needed for design of treatment facilities. Introduction to experimental design principles and their application. Statistical analysis of experimental data for data interpretation, presentation and design.
CIV E 628 Municipal Solid Waste Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of municipal waste management to protect public health, municipal waste streams, waste stream analysis and prediction. Refuse collection, storage and hauling methods, and facilities. Engineering design and operation of solid waste processing, treatment and disposal methods: resource recovery, recycling programs, incineration, composting, landfilling, and novel techniques. Solid waste legislation and policies. Environment impacts, impact management and facility siting of waste facilities.
CIV E 631 Engineering Fluid Mechanics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Navier-Stokes equations and viscous flow. Turbulence and Reynolds equations. Potential flow. Boundary layers. Flow around bodies. Jets and wakes. Related Lab experiments.
CIV E 632 Hydraulic Structures Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Hydraulic design of water-handling structures used for extraction, retention, conveyance, control, regulation, energy dissipation, drainage, navigation, flood controls and other civil engineering schemes. Related Lab experiments.
CIV E 634 Numerical Methods in Hydraulics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of numerical methods for solution of linear and nonlinear systems of algebraic and ordinary differential equations. Finite difference, finite volume and finite element methods for partial differential equations with an emphasis on convection dominated transport equation problems. Stability and accuracy analysis of numerical methods.
CIV E 635 Environmental Fluid Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mixing processes and pollutant transport in rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal waters, and the atmosphere. Prerequisite: CIV E 631.
CIV E 636 Ice Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Elementary heat transfer analysis. Ice formation processes. Ice hydraulics. Ice mechanics. Interaction of ice and engineering structures.
CIV E 638 Experimental Fluid Mechanics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Methods used for the measurement and analysis of data in fluid mechanics experiments. Topics covered will include: dimensional analysis and similitude; digital data acquisition, digital signal processing, spectral analysis, error analysis, surface wave height and slope measurements; laser-Doppler velocimetry, acoustic-Doppler velocimetry, particle-image velocimetry, high speed video and flow visualization.
CIV E 641 Advanced Surface Water Hydrology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Precipitation, evaporation, infiltration. Streamflow and hydrograph analysis. Hydrologic systems. Hydrologic routing. Simulation models. Statistical methods.
CIV E 645 Water Resources Planning and Management Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Systems concept on the planning and management of water resources systems. Engineering economics and economic theories. Evaluate and optimize the design and operations of water resources systems using Linear Programming, chance-constrained Linear Programming, Dynamic Programming, Stochastic Dynamic Programming, constrained and unconstrained nonlinear programming. Optimal sizing and operations of reservoir systems and hydropower using HEC5 and urban stormwater management system.
CIV E 649 Natural Resources Management Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Related Lab experiments. The course focuses on key topics in natural resource management and modelling: sustainable development, systems thinking and modelling, and risk and reliability analysis. Specific applications may include examples from sustainable forestry, water resources management, mining, the energy sector (and particularly the petrochemical industry), and municipal infrastructure.
CIV E 653 Readings in Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Management of construction projects: organizational issues, advanced time management, total quality management, materials management, change control and management of change.
CIV E 654 Artificial Intelligence and Automation in Construction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prototyping techniques applied to the design and development of systems based on artificial intelligence techniques for use in construction.
CIV E 657 Air Pollution Control Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Overview of air quality regulations. Overview of fundamental principles in air quality engineering. Theory and application of processes for gaseous and particulate pollutants control, including incineration, adsorption, absorption, biofiltration, cyclonic separation, electrostatic precipitation, filtration, and scrubbing. Special applications may include the control of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, and mobile/automotive emissions.
CIV E 660 Advanced Structural Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Direct stiffness theory and modeling of three dimensional framed structures. Linear and nonlinear stability concepts. Approximate and Direct stiffness formulation of geometric nonlinear problems.
CIV E 661 Dynamics of Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dynamics of single and multiple degree of freedom systems. Time step methods. Modal and response spectrum analysis for earthquake loading. Random vibration analysis. Dynamic wind loading analysis. Dynamics of foundations.
CIV E 664 Introduction to Solid Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formulation of basic equations of elasticity in solid mechanics. Cartesian tensor notation. Variational principles.
CIV E 665 Introduction to the Finite Element Method Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of the formulation and application of the finite element method to problems of continuum mechanics, with special reference to civil engineering, including problems in solid mechanics and soil mechanics. Prerequisite: CIV E 664 or consent of Instructor.
CIV E 669 Fracture and Fatigue of Civil Engineering Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to fracture mechanics of steel structures, concepts of brittle and ductile fracture, design approach to prevent brittle fracture. Application of fracture mechanics to fatigue, crack initiation and crack propagation prediction, design of civil engineering structures for fatigue under constant and variable amplitude loading. Design and fabrication considerations to minimize risks of brittle fracture and control fatigue resistance, fracture control plans and crack detection.
CIV E 670 Behaviour and Design of Steel Members Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Material properties of structural steels and limit states design concepts. Behaviour and design of steel tension and compression members, beams, and beam-columns. Torsion of members with open cross- sections and plate buckling problems. This course is designed to give the student an advanced understanding of the behaviour of individual members that form the steel structure.
CIV E 672 Behavior and Design of Concrete Members Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Strength and behavior of simple reinforced concrete members. Relation between results of research and current design specifications. Material properties. Members subjected to flexure, axial compression, combined flexure and axial load, combined flexure and shear, torsion.
CIV E 674 Behavior and Design of Prestressed Concrete Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). (Offered alternate years.) Principles and methods of prestressing. Service load design and analysis. Behavior and strength design. Losses in prestress and anchorage zone stresses. Continuous beams and slabs. Discussion of design specifications.
CIV E 676 Behavior and Design of Masonry Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). (Offered alternate years.) Historical developments. Masonry units, mortars and grouts. Behavior, strength and stability of masonry under axial compression. Reinforced masonry in bending and combined axial load and bending. Ductility and joint control. Design application including discussion of code requirements.
CIV E 678 Behaviour and Design of Steel Seismic Force Resisting Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). General earthquake engineering concepts and associated requirements of the National Building Code of Canada. Pushover analysis of steel frames. Capacity design philosophy. Seismic behaviour and design of moment-resisting frames, concentrically and eccentrically braced frames, and steel plate shear walls.
CIV E 679 Design of Highway Bridges Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Design of highway bridges according to the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code. The course covers topics such as: aesthetic considerations, loading, analysis for moving loads, stability under moving loads, design of steel plate girders and box girders, design for brittle fracture and fatigue, design of prestressed concrete girders, and design of the substructure.
CIV E 680 Engineering Properties of Soils Œ4 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-1). Principle of effective stress, clay-water systems, soil compressibility and theories of consolidation. Pore pressure parameters. Strength of granular and cohesive media. Anisotropy of soils. Laboratory measurement of strength and deformation properties. Stress-strain relations.
CIV E 681 Seepage and Drainage Œ4 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-1). Elements of hydrogeology; regional groundwater flow, borehole logging methods. Theory of groundwater flow through soils and rocks, permeability, Darcy’s law, field governing equations and their solution by approximate methods, finite difference and finite element methods, unsaturated flow. Civil engineering applications, seepage in earth structures, design of dewatering systems for excavations and slopes, field testing, grouting.
CIV E 682 Environmental Geotechnics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Environmental laws and regulatory processes; geotechnical characterization for environmental problems; transfer processes; elements of groundwater contaminants, geotechnical aspects of waste management; mine waste; dumps and tailings dams; design of landfills; in-situ characterization; site remediations; geotechnical aspects of nuclear waste storage.
CIV E 683 Site Investigation Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Techniques of site investigation for geotechnical engineering, in situ testing, instrumentation for field performance studies, case histories covering both rock and soil applications.
CIV E 684 Engineering Geology and Terrain Analysis Œ4 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-1). Information sources in engineering geology and terrain analysis, elements of the geology of sediments and glacial geology. Glacial and periglacial land forms. Photogeology and airphoto interpretation applied to geotechnical engineering. Case histories based on specific materials and regional problems.
CIV E 687 Rock Engineering for Near Surface Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Deterministic and probabilistic design methods for rock slopes and foundations on rocks. Economic, operational and geological factors affecting design. Support and stabilization techniques, excavation methods, monitoring structures in and on rock, foundations for dams and for large loads.
CIV E 690 Advanced Foundation Engineering Œ4 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-1). Theories of lateral pressures. Limit equilibrium methods, elasticity methods, semi-empirical methods. Soil anchors. Design of retaining walls and strutted excavations. Bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations. Allowable settlement of structures. Analysis of settlement of shallow and deep foundations. Behavior of pile groups. Design problems in foundation engineering.
CIV E 692 Tunnelling Œ3.5 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Methods of tunnelling, including excavation methods and support techniques, ground response, in situ and induced stress field, displacement field around deep and near surface tunnels, ground-support interaction, design criteria for tunnels in soil and rock, shaft design, site investigation practice and monitoring of tunnels.
CIV E 695 Soil Structures Œ4 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-1). Stresses in slopes. Limit equilibrium methods of analysis. Landslides in soil. Design of earth dams and embankments. Case histories of earth and rockfill dams. Dam foundations. Soft ground tunnelling.
CIV E 697 Rock Engineering Œ4 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-1). Elements of structural geology, analysis of the geometry of rock defects, properties of intact rocks. Properties of rock masses and stresses in rock masses, stability of rock slopes. Rock foundations and underground excavations in rock. Case studies.
CIV E 698 Petroleum Geomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application geotechnical engineering principles to petroleum engineering problems. Principles of thermo-poroelasticity are reviewed. Borehole stability, hydraulic fracturing, subsidence/heave, sand production, formation damage and reservoir-geomechanical modelling are the major topics for the course. Special attention is given to geomechanical influences on reservoir flow processes. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
CIV E 709 Advanced Topics in Construction Engineering and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 719 Advanced Topics in Transportation and Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: permission of Department or Instructor. In this course various advanced topics on transportation engineering and planning will be taught. Some possible advanced topics are: advanced probability theory, traffic safety, travel survey method, ITS technology, advanced network analysis, travel behaviour analysis, integrated land use and transportation modelling, public transportation planning and designing, freight transportation, transportation logistics and operation research. New topics may be added later by the Instructors.
CIV E 728 Water and Wastewater Treatment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory, design and application of new or alternative processes for treatment of water and wastewater, including ozone, chlorine dioxide, ultraviolet radiation, advanced oxidation, membrane and others.
CIV E 729 Advanced Topics in Environmental Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 739 Advanced Topics in Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 749 Advanced Topics in Water Resources Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 779 Advanced Topics in Structural Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 789 Advanced Topics in Civil Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 799 Advanced Topics in Soil Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CIV E 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in a Masters of Engineering program.
CIV E 910 Directed Research Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in the joint MBA/MEng program.
#
Classics
CLASS
Department of History and Classics Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) None of the courses under this heading will fulfil the language other than English requirements for the Faculty of Arts.
(2) Courses under this heading from 100-400 level may be taken by students with no knowledge of Greek or Latin. Knowledge of Greek or Latin may be required at the 500-level.
(3) The 100-level courses provide the broadest introduction to Classics, while the 200-level courses are overviews of specific areas within Classics. The 300-level courses build upon the 200-level courses and have suitable prerequisites. Note: Some 300-level courses do not have a specific topic and the details of the topic to be offered in any given year can be obtained from the Department.
(4) All 400-level courses under this heading have a prerequisite of at least one senior level Classics, Greek, or Latin course.
(5) The courses numbered 460 through the 500-level are designed for Classics majors, honors, and graduate students. Because precise topics in any given course may vary from year to year, students’ interests are taken into account. For additional related courses see Greek (GREEK) and Latin (LATIN) listings.
Undergraduate Courses
CLASS 102 Greek and Roman Mythology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of classical mythology with readings in translation from various ancient authors as well as from modern scholarly works.
CLASS 103 Introduction to Ancient Greece Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formerly CLASS 270.
CLASS 104 Introduction to Ancient Rome Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formerly CLASS 271.
CLASS 110 The Ancient World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). World history from the beginning of written records to the sixth century AD. The ancient history of the Mediterranean world, with particular emphasis on Egypt, Greece and Rome and compares developments in civilization in these areas with those in Persia, India and China.
CLASS 220 Introduction to the Methodology, Theory and Practice of Classical Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CLASS 221 Literature of Greece and Rome Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory survey in English translation of major works from Greek and Latin literature. This will include epic, lyric, and drama. May not be taken concurrently with or subsequent to CLASS 321/322.
CLASS 254 Introduction to Greek Art and Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the art, artifacts, and monuments of the Ancient Greek World. Formerly CLASS 252.
CLASS 255 Introduction to Roman Art and Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the art, artifacts, and monuments of the Ancient Roman World. Formerly CLASS 252.
CLASS 261 Women, Gender and Sexuality in the Ancient World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of women and the construction of gender and sexuality in Greek and Roman society from the Archaic period to Late Antiquity.
CLASS 280 Introduction to Ancient Greek History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Not open to students with credit in any two of CLASS 371, 372, and 373.
CLASS 282 Introductory Roman History I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). From the foundation of the city to the fall of the Republic. Not open to students with credit in CLASS 281, 365 or 366.
CLASS 283 Introductory Roman History II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The Roman Empire to the late fifth century. Not open to students with credit in CLASS 281, 378 or 379.
CLASS 291 Introduction to Scientific Terminology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The Greek and Latin elements of modern scientific terminology, with an examination of its history and cultural background.
CLASS 294 Ancient Science, Technology, and Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the development of science, technology, and medicine in the ancient world with particular reference to the civilizations of Greece and Rome.
CLASS 299 Topics in the Ancient World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CLASS 303 Religion in Greco-Roman Antiquity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the nature of pre-Christian religious practices in antiquity.
CLASS 304 Warfare in Greco-Roman Antiquity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development from Archaic Greece to Late Antiquity of warfare, both in its technical aspects and as a political and socio- cultural phenomenon. Prerequisite: Any of CLASS 103, 104, or any CLASS course at the 200 level or above or HIST 295 or 296.
CLASS 321 Literature and Culture of the Greek World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of Greek literature and their cultural context. All readings in English. Prerequisite: CLASS 102, 221 or consent of Department.
CLASS 322 Literature and Culture of the Roman World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representative works of Latin and Greek literature and their cultural context. All readings in English. Prerequisite: CLASS 102, 221 or consent of Department.
CLASS 330 From Alexander the Great to Cleopatra: The Hellenistic World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of the Hellenistic world from Alexander the Great to the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium. Special emphasis will be placed upon Alexander’s successors and the development of the Hellenistic kingdoms.
CLASS 354 Topics in Greek Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of one aspect of the Classical Greek World. (Emphasis in any one year may be archaeological, historical or literary). Prerequisites: CLASS 254 or 280.
CLASS 355 Topics in Roman Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of one aspect of the Classical Roman World. (Emphasis in any one year may be archaeological, historical or literary). Prerequisites: CLASS 255, 282 or 283.
CLASS 356 Topics in Ancient Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of one aspect of art in the Greco- Roman world. Prerequisites: CLASS 254 or 255.
CLASS 376 Early Civilization I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the beginnings and development of civilization in the Near East, including Sumer, Babylon, Assyria, and the Hebrews. Note: not open to students with credit in RELIG 305.
CLASS 380 History of Palestine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). From the Persian Conquest to the time of Jesus. Note: not open to students with credit in RELIG 308.
CLASS 399 Topics in the Ancient World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CLASS 400 Topics in the Culture and Society of Greco-Roman Antiquity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Any course at or above the 200-level in CLASS, GREEK or LATIN, or consent of Department.
CLASS 463 Topics in Roman History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: CLASS 282 or 283 or consent of Department.
CLASS 473 Topics in Classical Archaeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Any CLASS course at the 200 level or above or consent of Department. May be repeated for credit when course content differs.
CLASS 475 Techniques of Classical Field Archaeology Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, 0-10L-0). The techniques of survey, excavation and recording in Classical Archaeology. Prerequisites: Students must be either Classics majors or in a Classics graduate program. Note: Offered only for fieldwork in the archaeology of the Greek and Roman world and restricted to those participating in a fieldwork program sponsored by the Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CLASS 476 Advanced Field Techniques in Classical Archaeology Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, 0-10L-0). Advanced field application of Classical Archaeological Theory. Prerequisites: CLASS 475 or equivalent. Note: Offered only for fieldwork in the archaeology of the Greek and Roman world and restricted to those participating in a fieldwork program sponsored by the Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CLASS 478 Topics in Roman Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In-depth study of aspects of Roman art. Prerequisite: Any CLASS course at the 200 level or above or consent of Department. May be repeated for credit when course content differs.
CLASS 480 Topics in the Archaeology of the Roman Provinces Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: CLASS 282, 283 or 355 or consent of Department.
CLASS 481 Topics in Greek History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: CLASS 280 or consent of Department.
CLASS 498 Individual Study of Literary Problems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Any one of CLASS 221, 261, 321, 322, or consent of Department.
CLASS 499 Individual Study of Historical and Archaeological Problems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
CLASS 500 Fourth-Year Honors Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
CLASS 501 Research Methods and Resources in Classics Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-1s-0).
CLASS 502 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This is a credit/fail course. Not open to students in the non-thesis program.
CLASS 505 Topics in the Culture and Society of Greco-Roman Antiquity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
CLASS 515 Topics in the Archaeology of Greece Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
CLASS 516 Topics in the Archaeology of the Roman Provinces Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
CLASS 522 Studies in Ancient History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
CLASS 578 Roman Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
CLASS 599 Individual Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Repeatable.
CLASS 601 Studies in Classical Archaeology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CLASS 602 Studies in Classical Archaeology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CLASS 900 Directed Research Project Œ3-9 (variable) (either term, unassigned).
#
Communication Sciences and Disorders
CSD
Communication Sciences and Disorders Department Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Note: CSD courses are open to CSD students only.
Undergraduate Courses
CSD 200 Introduction to Communication Sciences and Disorders =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An overview of the scientific study of communication, major types of speech, language, and hearing disorders, and the work of professionals in speech-language pathology and audiology. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
CSD 211 Language Development in Children and Adolescents =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). Introduction to the study of the development of all aspects of language, from sounds to social interaction, from birth through adolescence. Includes a review of theories and current research as well as practice with analyses of children’s language. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Consent of Department required. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent. Note: Credit cannot be received for both CSD 211 and LING 319.
Graduate Courses
CSD 501 Clinical Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Investigation of strategies for demonstrating scientifically the impact of clinical intervention programs, both for accountability and for contributing to the knowledge base regarding effective treatment. Students will be advised to approach staff members as resources for development of specific projects in anticipation of CSD 900. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 501.
CSD 502 Anatomy and Physiology of the Speech Mechanism Œ4 (fi 8) (first term, 4-0-2). Lectures and demonstrations provide a systematic study of the gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the respiratory, phonatory, resonatory, and articulatory subsystems and the physiology of respiration, phonation, and upper airway in speech production and swallowing. The embryological and post-natal development of these systems is considered. Review of the neural substrates underlying speech and language processing is included. Laboratories provide observational and simulated dissection experiences using computer software video, anatomical models, and prosected materials. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 502.
CSD 505 Speech Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Study of theoretical and applied aspects of acoustic phonetics, speech perception and speech production, including theory and application of methods (physiological, acoustic and perceptual) to record and analyze speech behaviors. Provides students with basic knowledge for entry into the field of speech-language pathology. Pre or corequisites: CSD 502 or equivalent, CSD 507 and 515. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 505.
CSD 507 Phonological Disorders Œ3.5 (fi 7) (either term, 0-4.5L-0). In-depth study of the nature, assessment and remediation of articulatory/phonological disorders according to various theoretical models. Emphasis will be placed on phonologically based clinical approaches including phonological process analysis and generative phonology. Practical experience in assessment and remediation will be provided through clinical observation and laboratory experiences. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 507.
CSD 509 Motor Speech Disorders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Study of dysarthria and dyspraxia (congenital and acquired) including the nature of their underlying neuropathologies, methods of instrumental and perceptual assessment, and systematic instrumental and behavioral management strategies. Students will develop their understanding of the course material via a series of clinical problem solving and treatment planning exercises. Prerequisites: CSD 502 or equivalent and CSD 505, 507, 511. Pre or corequisite: CSD 520. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 509.
CSD 511 Child Language Development and Assessment Œ3.5 (fi 7) (either term, 0-4.5L-0). A review of normal language development provides the basis for a comprehensive study of the assessment and identification of children with language disorders. Assessment procedures involve language test administration and interpretation. Discussion of research findings highlights disordered language behaviors associated with such problems as mental retardation, emotional problems, and learning disabilities. The laboratory provides experience in administering a variety of language tests. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 511.
CSD 515 Hearing Science/Audiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Study of basic audiology for speech-language pathologists. Includes anatomy and physiology of the auditory and vestibular systems, theories of hearing, the physics and measurement of sound (including psychophysical methods and psychoacoustics), symptoms, etiology and prognosis of hearing disorders, overview of assessment procedures and instrumentation used in diagnostic audiology, and application of audiometric results to speech- language pathology. Proficiency in hearing and tympanometry screening, including care and maintenance of equipment, is acquired in laboratory sessions. Pre or corequisite: CSD 502. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 515.
CSD 516 Diagnosis and Appraisal of Communication Disorders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). A study of the principles underlying the evaluative and management procedures in communication disorders. History taking, report writing, recording observations, analysis of tests relevant to the clinical process and test procedure administration will be covered. Corequisite: CSD 524. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 516.
CSD 518 Remediation of Child Language Disorders Œ2.5 (fi 5) (either term, 0-3.5L-0). A study of the theoretical models of intervention and clinical application in remediating children’s disordered language patterns. Specific attention focused toward commercial and clinician-generated programs that serve these various theoretical frameworks. Discussion of language goals, intervention strategies and accountability measures that serve to guide the therapeutic process and determine treatment effectiveness. The laboratory provides opportunity to observe therapy and design sample language therapy units. Prerequisite: CSD 511. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 518.
CSD 520 Adult Language Disorders I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Study of acquired aphasia including the nature of the underlying neuropathologies, methods of differential diagnosis and comprehensive assessment, and clinically-pertinent behavioral management strategies. Students will develop their understanding of the course material via a series of clinical problem solving and treatment planning exercises. Prerequisite: CSD 502 or equivalent. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 520.
CSD 521 Dysphagia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Students will understand bases of normal and abnormal feeding and swallowing in children and adults, etiologies and conditions commonly associated with dysphagia, principles and procedures for diagnosis and treatment across age spans and conditions and complications associated with management; and be able to develop remediation plans and functional goals within an interdisciplinary team framework. Prerequisite: CSD 502 or equivalent. (Restricted to MScSLP students.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 521.
CSD 523 Augmentative/Alternative Communication Systems Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-2L-0). This course will provide a description of various augmentative/alternative communication systems, including microcomputers. It will address assessment questions and the intervention process for individual users with communication disorders. Prerequisite: CSD 518. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 523.
CSD 524 Introduction to Clinical Practicum I Œ7.5 (fi 15) (two term, 0-8c-2). Credit. Practical application of clinical procedures under direct supervision. Normally, students will possess an academic background enabling them to assume direct treatment responsibilities with children and adults having disorders of articulation and/or language. A minimum of 48 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Seminar content will include topics of clinical and/or professional significance such as ethics, health law, private practice, goal setting and data collection. Flexibility in seminar topics will accommodate new topics as they arise. Prerequisites: At least six MScSLP courses including CSD 507, 511, 518. Corequisite: CSD 516. (Restricted to MScSLPs students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 524.
CSD 525 Introduction to Clinical Practicum II Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-2c-0). Credit. Continued practical application of clinical procedures under direct supervision. Normally students will acquire experience with alternative service delivery models such as group treatment. A minimum of 25 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisite: CSD 524. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 525.
CSD 526 Voice and Resonance Disorders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A study of the causes, nature, clinical assessment, and management of voice and resonance disorders. Prerequisites: CSD 502 and 505. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 526.
CSD 527 Language and Literacy Œ2.5 (fi 5) (either term, 0-3.5L-0). Study of language development in school-age children and adolescents, with focus on the relationships among oral language, reading, and writing; linguistic tasks faced by these age groups in school and elsewhere; and implications for language assessment and intervention. Prerequisites: CSD 511 and 518. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 527.
CSD 528 Fluency Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A study of the development, nature and treatment of stuttering with particular emphasis on management strategies. Pre or corequisite: CSD 501. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 528.
CSD 529 Adult Language Disorders II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Study of conditions (other than aphasia) affecting language, social, and cognitive functioning in adults, including traumatic brain injury, dementia, and right hemisphere dysfunction, and issues related to the aging process. Nature of underlying neuropathologies and their implications for differential diagnosis, assessment, and management will be addressed. Prerequisite: CSD 520. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 529.
CSD 532 Advanced Clinical Practicum Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 0-12c-0). Credit. Full-time supervised clinical practice normally for a period of six weeks in an approved clinical service facility. Students will have completed all academic course work and will be prepared to work with a broad range of communication disorders under reduced supervision. A minimum of 75 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisites: CSD 525 and all MScSLP academic courses. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 532.
CSD 533 Advanced Clinical Practicum Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 0-12c-0). Credit. Full-time supervised clinical practice normally for a period of six weeks in an approved clinical service facility. Students will have completed all academic course work and will be prepared to work with a broad range of communication disorders under reduced supervision. A minimum of 75 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisites: CSD 525 and all MScSLP academic courses. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 533.
CSD 534 Aural (Re)habilitation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Study of the diagnostic and treatment strategies for communication problems associated with childhood and adult onset hearing loss. Prerequisites: CSD 505, 507, 511 and 515. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 534.
CSD 540 Advanced Clinical Practicum Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 0-12c-0). Credit. Full-time supervised clinical practice normally for a period of six weeks in an approved clinical service facility. Students will have completed all academic course work and will be prepared to work with a broad range of communication disorders under reduced supervision. A minimum of 75 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisites: CSD 532 and 533. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 540.
CSD 541 Advanced Clinical Practicum Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 0-12c-0). Credit. Full-time supervised clinical practice normally for a period of six weeks in an approved clinical service facility. Students will have completed all academic course work and will be prepared to work with a broad range of communication disorders under reduced supervision. A minimum of 75 direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisites: CSD 532 and 533. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 541.
CSD 597 Advanced Clinical Practicum Œ1-4.5 (variable) (either term, variable). May be repeated. Credit. Full-time supervised clinical practice for a period varying from four to twelve weeks in an approved clinical service facility. Students will have completed all academic course work and will be prepared to work with a broad range of communication disorders under reduced supervision. Direct contact hours as well as simulated and indirect contact hours will be accrued. Prerequisites: CSD 516 and 524 and permission of the department. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.)
CSD 598 Directed Individual Reading and Research Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). May be repeated. Prerequisite: consent of Department. (MScSLP)
CSD 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3s-0). Required capping exercise for the MScSLP program. Intended to develop students’ inquiry, reflection, critical thinking, and writing skills and to provide a supervised experience in the disciplined investigation of a problem. Prerequisite: CSD 501. (Restricted to MScSLP students only.) Not open to students with credit in SPA 900.
#
Communications and Technology
COMM
Faculty of Extension
Graduate Courses
For more information email mact@ualberta.ca, visit www.mact.ca or phone (780) 492-1538.
COMM 501 Applied Research in Communications and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to quantitative and qualitative approaches for conducting research into technology-mediated communications. Guides students in their topic selection and development for their culminating project. Restricted to MACT students, normally in the second year. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 501 and COMM 501. Prerequisite: COMM 502 and COMM 503 or consent of the Department.
COMM 502 Human Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Survey of classic theories and emerging perspectives in communication studies. Emphasizes the development of skills for analyzing and understanding communication in context. Restricted to MACT students, normally in the first year. Offered during the Spring Institute. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 502 and COMM 502.
COMM 503 Social Impact of Digital Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course explores the social impact of digital communications, with a specific focus on new and emerging social media and networks. Course themes cover a broad range of topics on the history and development of digital communications including social networks, virtual communities, and participatory culture. This course also touches on legal, ethical, and practical dimensions of digital communications as they relate to a range of personal and professional contexts. Restricted to MACT students, normally in the first year. Offered during the Spring Institute. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 503 and COMM 503.
COMM 504 Organizational Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). This course deals with both internal communications (formal and informal) within an organization, and external communications (public relations, media relations, print and multimedia communications). Brief survey of the field of organizational analysis, with focus on marketing, clear language writing, rhetoric, public speaking, and writing for new media (e.g. hypertext). Restricted to MACT students. Course delivered by asynchronous Internet communication. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 504 and COMM 504. Prerequisites: COMM 502 and COMM 503 or consent of the Department.
COMM 505 Contemporary Issues in Communications and Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current and emerging issues in communications and technology will be explored with an emphasis on providing professionals with an advanced understanding of current developments in the field informed by historical and critical theoretical perspectives. Restricted to MACT students. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 505 and COMM 505. Prerequisites: COMM 502 and COMM 503 or consent of the Department.
COMM 506 Strategic Communications in a Digital World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The conceptual and practical foundations for effective strategic communications management will be examined, providing professionals with the insights and skills needed to integrate digital media into strategic communications planning for a range of organizations including non-profit, education, government, health, and private sector. Restricted to MACT students. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 506 and COMM 506. Prerequisites: COMM 502 and COMM 503 or consent of the Department.
COMM 507 Knowledge Management and Communications Technologies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores managing knowledge from an organizational perspective. Covers knowledge-management technologies and tools, as well as emerging issues and trends. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 507 and COMM 507.
COMM 508 Culminating Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, unassigned). Under supervision, students undertake a project that addresses some practical problem, issue, or objective related to communications and technology. Restricted to MACT students. Course delivered by asynchronous Internet communication. Not available to students admitted to the program after May 2010.
COMM 509 Advanced Seminar in Research Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced seminar on qualitative and quantitative approaches for conducting research in communications and technology. This course provides students with in depth study of research design and guides them in preparation for commencing their culminating project. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Restricted to MACT course-based students. Prerequisite: COMM 501 or consent of the department.
COMM 511 Topics in Research Methods Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned). Introduction to approaches for conducting research into technology-mediated communications, with an emphasis on qualitative methods. Students may not receive credit for both COMM 501 and COMM 511. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication, in the classroom, or as a tutorial.
COMM 550 Introduction to Electronic Commerce =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). An introduction to the concepts, technologies, and functions of electronic commerce. Considers the organizational implications of electronic commerce as a broad shift in how transactions are completed in the marketplace. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 555 and COMM 550.
COMM 552 Intellectual Property: The Copyright Component =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). An introduction to intellectual property with emphasis on Canadian copyright law as it applies to the development of multimedia projects. Examines the protection provided by trademarks, patents, and copyright for such media as digital photographs, logos, and inventions. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 552 and EXT 597 titled Intellectual Property: The Copyright Component and COMM 552.
COMM 553 Facilitating Communication and Understanding Through Utilization-Based Evaluation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Senior seminar course examining the use of evaluation within various organizational contexts, with an emphasis on survey and focus-group methods. Student activities include development of an evaluation plan. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Students may not receive credit for both EXT 553 and EXT 597 titled Facilitating Communications and Understanding through Utilization-Focused Evaluation and COMM 553.
COMM 554 Risk Communication =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory, research, and practice of risk communication are explored through the introduction of models of risk communication and risk assessment in various contexts which may include environmental issues, public health and safety, occupational hazards, and consumer products. Students may not receive credit for both COMM 597 (Case Studies in Risk Communication) and COMM 554.
COMM 555 New Media Narratives =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Providing insights into the role of new media in the practices and processes of writing, editing, and publishing, the focus will be on the interpretation of new media use in the development and future of publishing. A critical assessment of the tools and skills required for participation in publishing in the era of the Internet will be examined. Students may not receive credit for both COMM 597 (New Media Narratives) and COMM 555.
COMM 590 Conference Course in Communications and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Offered by asynchronous Internet communication, in the classroom, or as a tutorial.
COMM 597 Topics in Communications and Technology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). An elective course on selected topics in communications and technology.
COMM 598 Directed Study in Communications and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). An elective course to be completed under the direction of a faculty member. Requires the approval of the Director. Offered by asynchronous Internet communication.
COMM 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, unassigned). Offered by asynchronous Internet communication. Restricted to MACT students. Students may not receive credit for both COMM 508 and COMM 900.
#
Community Engagement
MACE
Faculty of Extension
Graduate Courses
MACE 501 The Practice of Community Engaged Scholarship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to the conceptual foundations of the practice of community - engaged research and evaluation, with application across diverse disciplines and forms of engagement (e.g., health care, community development, government). A required course for students in the Master of Arts in Community Engagement program; others interested must seek consent of the instructor.
MACE 502 Theoretical Foundations of the Scholarship of Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of the theoretical foundations that have shaped the study of community engagement. Students will explore this through a broad spectrum of disciplines and themes. A required course for students in the Master of Arts in Community Engagement program; others interested must seek consent of the instructor.
MACE 503 Methods of Community Based Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to research which broadly includes quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods. Research design, formulating research questions, selecting appropriate methods, sampling, data analysis and knowledge mobilization will be included. This course is designed as a seminar, while some classes will be structured, the intent is for participants to learn from each other’s experiences and research examples.
MACE 597 Topics in Community Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course will address current issues in community engagement. A variety of topic areas may be offered. Course title is variable and the course may be repeated.
MACE 598 Directed Study in Community Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In collaboration with a faculty member, the student will propose a course of study to be undertaken. Course may be repeated.
#
Community Service-Learning
CSL
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
CSL 100 An Introduction to Community Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary introduction to community and civic engagement for students interested in preparing the groundwork for undertaking further experiential educational opportunities (e.g., Internships, Study Abroad, CSL).
CSL 300 Theory and Practice in Community Service-Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth exploration of theories and practices of civic engagement and community change for students who have already completed a course with a CSL component and who wish to extend their volunteer experience. Prerequisite: Completion of a course with a CSL component or consent of instructor. Note: For information about courses in programs and departments across the Faculty of Arts that offer a CSL component, see the link on the CSL website, www.csl.ualberta.ca
CSL 350 Selected Topics in Community Service-Learning Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, unassigned). Content varies from year to year. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. This course may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CSL 360 Community Service-Learning Practicum Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, unassigned). Course content varies from year to year but will include a significant service component. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Corequisite: CSL 350 or other approved course. This course may require payment of an additional miscellaneous fee. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
CSL 370 Topics in Community Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Content varies from year to year. Prerequisite: consent of Program. Repeatable if topic(s) vary.
CSL 480 Individual Study in Community Service-Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). Individual study opportunity on topics for which no specific course is currently offered. Prerequisites: Consent of Community Service - Learning Director, consent of instructor, and completion of a 3 credit course with a CSL component.
Graduate Courses
CSL 550 Selected Topics in Community Service-Learning Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, unassigned). Content varies from year to year. Topics and credit value announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. This course may require payment of an additional miscellaneous fee.
CSL 570 Topics in Community Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Content varies from year to year. Prerequisite: consent of Program.
#
Comparative Literature
C LIT
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) Courses in Comparative Literature teach a number of literature’s from and international perspective with the help of translations as necessary.
(2) See the following sections for listings of other Office of Interdisciplinary programs. Humanities Computing (HUCO): Interdisciplinary (INT D) Faculty of Arts Courses; Middle Eastern and African Studies (MEAS); Religious Studies (RELIG); Science, Technology and Society (STS) and Writing Studies (WRS).
Undergraduate Courses
C LIT 101 World Literature I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to major works of the world’s literary heritage, presented in their historical, social, and cultural contexts. Covers the period from the beginnings of literary civilizations until the 17th century. Not open to students with C LIT 100.
C LIT 102 World Literature II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to major works of the world’s literary heritage, presented in their historical, social, and cultural contexts. Covers the period from the 17th century through the present day. Not open to students with credit in C LIT 100.
C LIT 206 History of Literary Theory I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of theories of literature, from Plato through 20th century New Criticism.
C LIT 207 History of Literary Theory II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major recent and contemporary theoretical schools, including structuralism, poststructuralism, reader response, hermeneutics, feminism, queer theory, Marxism, and postcolonialism.
C LIT 210 Cyberliterature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the relations between literature and online textuality.
C LIT 220 Mythology and Literature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines how world mythologies have been given literary expression, both in ancient texts and modern reworkings.
C LIT 228 Literature, Popular Culture, and the Visual Arts =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Poetics of such popular genres as crime fiction, spy fiction, the horror story, etc., and their relation to mainstream literature and culture.
C LIT 230 Scandalous Fictions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The importance of scandal both to the reception of particular literary works, and to literary history in general.
C LIT 242 Science Fiction =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to science fiction as an international genre and a survey of works and trends
C LIT 243 Fairy Tales and Folk Tales =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of European fairy tales and an introduction to critical and theoretical approaches to the folk tale in general and the fairy tale in particular.
C LIT 266 Women and World Literature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of major works of world literature by women from antiquity to the present.
C LIT 290 Literature Reimagined =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variable content. This course aims to introduce students to new ways of thinking about literature, and about its relations with other disciplines or society at large.
C LIT 347 Elements of Genre =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variable content. A detailed survey of the main features of one given genre, either narrative fiction, poetry, or drama. Not open to students who have completed C LIT 344, 345 or 346.
C LIT 352 Literature and the Other Arts =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Throughout history, literature had close relations with the other arts (such as painting and sculpture, music and theatre): more recently these relations extended to cinema television, and other media. Each year, the course will emphasize one of these relations, in an interdisciplinary perspective which stresses contacts and commonalities, but also the specific differences of art forms and the media.
C LIT 358 Great Themes of Literature and Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The international and interdisciplinary study of selected international mythical and legendary themes and motifs, such as Faust and Don Juan, their origin, and their literary and artistic developments.
C LIT 425 East/West Critical Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings in English of East Asian and Euro-American philosophers and critics. Prerequisite: *3 in a humanities discipline, or consent of Department. Not to be taken by students with credit in EASIA 425.
C LIT 426 Orientalisms and Occidentalisms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical reading of Western representations of the East, and Eastern representations of the West. All readings in English. Prerequisite: *3 in a humanities discipline, or consent of Department. Not to be taken by students with credit in EASIA 426.
C LIT 440 Comparative Studies in Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An international historical and typological analysis of selected topics in popular literature and media, their changing status in society and culture, as well as their interaction with canonized forms of literature and the arts.
C LIT 448 Studies in Critical Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced study of a particular critical theory. Topics may include Feminism, Marxism, Post-Colonialism.
C LIT 460 Fundamentals of Comparative Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Disciplinary issues, approaches and methodologies in Comparative Literature as they differ from those of national literatures.
C LIT 464 Studies in Literary Genres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced study of ‘genre’ (e.g. the novel) in an international and a particular historical context.
C LIT 480 Directed Reading in Comparative Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of the Program Coordinator.
C LIT 497 Special Topics in Comparative Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
C LIT 499 Honors Tutorial and Essay Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors Essay.
Graduate Courses
C LIT 501 Studies in World Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced level survey of major works of world literature from antiquity to the 17th century. Prerequisite: Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 502 Studies in World Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced-level survey of major works of world literatures and literary movements from 18th century to 21st century. Prerequisite: Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 511 History of Literary Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A historical survey of literary theory from Plato to the New Criticism. Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 512 History of Literary Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of contemporary critical theory with emphasis on major theoretical schools after the New Criticism (20th-21st Centuries). Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 521 Directed Reading Course I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Program Coordinator.
C LIT 522 Directed Reading Course II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Program Coordinator.
C LIT 560 Theories of Comparative Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 585 Studies in Forms and Genres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 610 Special Topics in Literary Theory and Criticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Reading knowledge of one language other than English.
C LIT 698 Special Reading Course II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Program Coordinator.
C LIT 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Computer Engineering
CMPE
Departments of Computing Science; Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculties of Engineering and Science
The following courses were renumbered effective 2012-2013:
Undergraduate Courses
CMPE 450 Nanoscale System Design Project Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 1-0-6). Design and verification of high-performance digital systems that integrate nanoscale devices onto a single solid-state substrate or assembly. System-level specification, design and verification; design re-use strategies and alternatives; and the application of practical defect and error- tolerance techniques. Students work in teams. Restricted to students in the Nanoscale System Design Option.
CMPE 485 Embedded Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Applications of embedded systems and challenges of embedded systems design; embedded processors, embedded reconfigurable hardware, embedded software; specification, modeling, design and verification of embedded systems; real time systems; construction of event-driven systems; performance issues; practical examples. Corequisites: CMPE 401, CMPUT 379.
#
Computing Science
CMPUT
Department of Computing Science Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) There are many routes to the study of Computing Science. Students should seek advice from a department advisor or visit our website at www.cs.ualberta. ca/courses.
(2) The department of Computing Science does not allow audits in any of its laboratory courses.
(3) Special sections of CMPUT 196, 197, 198, 199, 296, 297, 298, 299, 396, 397, 398, 399, 496, 497, 498, 499 may have different prerequisites. Please check the specific course descriptions as posted by the Department of Computing Science.
Undergraduate Courses
CMPUT 101 Introduction to Computing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to fundamental concepts in computing science, including state, abstraction, composition, and representation. Introduction to algorithms, logic, circuits, machine architecture and other topics in elementary computing science. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has been obtained in CMPUT 114, 174 or SCI 100. See Note (1) above.
CMPUT 174 Introduction to the Foundations of Computation I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). CMPUT 174 and 175 use a problem-driven approach to introduce the fundamental ideas of Computing Science. Emphasis is on the underlying process behind the solution, independent of programming language or style. Basic notions of state, control flow, data structures, recursion, modularization, and testing are introduced through solving simple problems in a variety of domains such as text analysis, map navigation, game search, simulation, and cryptography. Students learn to program by reading and modifying existing programs as well as writing new ones. No prior programming experience is necessary. Prerequisite: Math 30 or 30-1. See Note (1) above.
CMPUT 175 Introduction to the Foundations of Computation II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A continuation of CMPUT 174, revisiting topics of greater depth and complexity. More sophisticated notions such as objects, functional programming, time and memory consumption, and user interface building are explored. Upon completion of this two course sequence, students from any discipline should be able to build programs to solve basic problems in their area, and will be prepared to take more advanced Computing Science courses. Prerequisite: CMPUT 174 or SCI 100.
CMPUT 201 Practical Programming Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the principles, methods, tools, and practices of the professional programmer. The lectures focus on the fundamental principles of software engineering based on abstract data types and their implementations. The laboratories offer an intensive apprenticeship to the aspiring software developer. Students use C and C++ and software development tools of the UNIX environment. Prerequisite: CMPUT 115 or 175.
CMPUT 204 Algorithms I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). The first of two courses on algorithm design and analysis, with emphasis on fundamentals of searching, sorting, and graph algorithms. Examples include divide and conquer, dynamic programming, greedy methods, backtracking, and local search methods, together with analysis techniques to estimate program efficiency. Prerequisites: one of CMPUT 115 or 175 and CMPUT 272; one of MATH 113, 114, 117 or 144 or SCI 100.
CMPUT 206 Introduction to Digital Image Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to basic digital image processing theory, and the tools that make advanced image manipulation possible for ordinary users. Image processing is important in many applications: editing and processing photographs, special effects for movies, drawing animated characters starting with photographs, analyzing and enhancing images captured by the mars rover or the Hubble telescope, an detecting suspects from surveillance cameras. Image processing concepts are introduced using tools like Photoshop and GIMP. Exposure to simple image processing programming with JAVA and Mathlab. This course is preparation for more advanced courses in the Digital Media area. Prerequisites: Any 100-level Computing Science course, plus knowledge of first-year level Math, Stat; and introductory JAVA, C, or similar programming experience; or consent of Instructor or SCI 100. Open to students in the Faculty of Arts, Engineering and Sciences, others require permission of the instructor.
CMPUT 210 Codes, Codemakers, Codebreakers: An Introduction to Cryptography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An historical introduction to cryptography intended for a general audience. The development of codes and code-breaking from military espionage in ancient Greece to deciphering hieroglyphics via the Rosetta stone to modern computer ciphers. Includes frequency analysis, one-time-pad security, and public key cryptography. Prerequisites: Any 100 level course.
CMPUT 229 Computer Organization and Architecture I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). General introduction to number representation, architecture and organization concepts of von Neumann machines, assembly level programming, exception handling, peripheral programming, floating-point computations and memory management. Prerequisite: CMPUT 115, 175 or 274. Corequisite: one of CMPUT 201 or 275. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212.
CMPUT 250 Computers and Games Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An interdisciplinary course for students in Science, Arts, and other faculties. The focus is on games as interactive entertainment, their role in society, and how they are made. Teams composed of students with diverse backgrounds (e.g. English, Art and Design, and Computing Science) follow the entire creative process: from concept, through pitch, to delivery, of a short narrative-based game using a commercial game engine. To achieve the required mix of backgrounds and experience, students must apply for admission to this course. Prerequisites: Second-year standing. See the Computing Science web site for more details at www.cs.ualberta.ca/courses
CMPUT 272 Formal Systems and Logic in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-0). An introduction to the tools of set theory, logic, and induction, and their use in the practice of reasoning about algorithms and programs. Basic set theory. The notion of a function. Counting. Propositional and predicate logic and their proof systems. Inductive definitions and proofs by induction. Program specification and correctness. Prerequisite: Any 100-level CMPUT course or SCI 100.
CMPUT 274 Introduction to Tangible Computing I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). This is part 1 of a 2 sequence intensive problem- based introduction to Computing Science. In part 1, the key concepts of procedural programming, basic algorithm design and analysis (lists, queues, trees, sorting, searching), and reactive interfacing with the world are learned by solving a series of problems using the Arduino platform and C/C++. The use of a resource-limited processor with no operating system opens up the inner workings of computing. Development is done using the Linux operating system with the exposed compiler tool chain. Prerequisites: No specific programming experience or discrete-math background is assumed. Math 30 or 31. Note: this course is taught in studio- style, where lectures and labs are blended into 3 hour sessions, twice a week. Enrollment is limited by the capacity of the combined lecture/lab facilities. Credit cannot be obtained for CMPUT 274 if one already has credit for any of CMPUT 174, 175, 201 or 204, except with permission of the Department.
CMPUT 275 Introduction to Tangible Computing II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). This is part 2 of a 2 sequence intensive introduction to Computing Science. Part 2 expands to add object-oriented programming, a higher level language (Python), and more complex algorithms and data structures such as shortest paths in graphs; caching, memoization, and dynamic programming; client-server style computing; recursion; and limited distributed of computation tasks between the Arduino platform and the traditional desktop in order to explore design tradeoffs. Prerequisite: CMPUT 274. Note: this course is taught in studio- style, where lectures and labs are blended into 3 hour sessions, twice a week. Enrollment is limited by the capacity of the combined lecture/lab facilities. Credit cannot be obtained for CMPUT 275 if one already has credit for any of CMPUT 174, 175, 201 or 204, except with permission of the Department.
CMPUT 291 Introduction to File and Database Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Basic concepts in computer data organization and information processing; entity-relationship model; relational model; SQL and other relational query languages; storage architecture; physical organization of data; access methods for relational data. Programming experience (e.g. Java or Python) is required for the course project. Prerequisite: one of CMPUT 115, 175 or 275.
CMPUT 300 Computers and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Social, ethical, professional, economic, and legal issues in the development and deployment of computer technology in society. Prerequisites: CMPUT course or SCI 100 , and any 200-level course.
CMPUT 301 Introduction to Software Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Object-oriented design and analysis, with interactive applications as the primary example. Topics include: software process; revision control; Unified Modeling Language (UML); requirements; software architecture, design patterns, frameworks, design guidelines; unit testing; refactoring; software tools. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201 or 275.
CMPUT 302 Introduction to Human Computer Interaction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A complementary course to introductory software engineering focused on a user-centered approach to software design. The main themes are how humans interact with physical and information environments, and how to design software with human’s information needs and their cognitive capacities in mind. Topics include the user-centered design cycle, and evaluation methods for discovering usability problems in interface design. Prerequisite: CMPUT 301.
CMPUT 304 Algorithms II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The second course of a two-course sequence on algorithm design. Emphasis on principles of algorithm design. Categories of algorithms such as divide-and-conquer, greedy algorithms, dynamic programming; analysis of algorithms; limits of algorithm design; NP-completeness; heuristic algorithms. Prerequisites: CMPUT 204 or 275; one of STAT 141, 151, 235 or 265 or SCI 151; one of MATH 225, 227, 228 or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 307 3D Modeling and Animation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introductory course on the theory and applications of computer based 3D modeling and animation. The course will cover a selection of topics from overview of tools supporting modeling and animation, automatically generating 3D models, and animation of skeleton based models through algorithms and software. Applications of 3D modeling and animation in games, virtual/ augmented environments, movies, and emerging video transmission algorithms will be discussed. Prerequisite: Some background in image processing or graphics, e.g., CMPUT 206 or CMPUT 311; knowledge of first or preferably second year level MATH/STAT, e.g., STAT 141/151/252 or 266, and MATH 214 or 225; experience in programming, e.g., CMPUT 174 or 100. Permission of instructor needed if some background courses are lacking.
CMPUT 313 Computer Networks Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to computer communication networks. Protocols for error and flow control. Wired and wireless medium access protocols. Routing and congestion control. Internet architecture and protocols. Multimedia transmission. Recent advances in networking. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 and 204 or 275; one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212 and STAT 252 or 266.
CMPUT 325 Non-Procedural Programming Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A study of the theory, run-time structure, and implementation of selected non-procedural programming languages. Languages will be selected from the domains of functional, and logic-based languages. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 and 204 or 275; one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212, and MATH 125.
CMPUT 328 Visual Recognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to visual recognition to recognize objects and classify scenes or images automatically by a computer. Supervised and unsupervised machine learning principles and deep learning techniques will be utilized for visual recognition. Successful commercial systems based on visual recognition range from entertainment to serious scientific research: face detection and recognition on personal devices, social media. Prerequisites: CMPUT 115 or 175, MATH 114, 125; STAT 141, 151 or 235.
CMPUT 329 Computer Organization and Architecture II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). CMOS technology, digital circuits, combinational logic, sequential logic, memory technologies, programmable logic devices, control logic design, register transfer logic, CPU design, hardware description languages. Prerequisite: one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPUT 329, E E 280 or ECE 210.
CMPUT 333 Security in a Networked World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Authentication protocols, passwords, shared and public key cryptography, network protocol and network services security, firewalls, malicious code, vulnerability identification, intrusion detection, wireless security. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201 or 275.
CMPUT 340 Introduction to Numerical Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). Computer arithmetic and errors. The study of computational methods for solving problems in linear algebra, non-linear equations, optimization, interpolation and approximation, and integration. This course will provide a basic foundation in numerical methods that supports further study in machine learning; computer graphics, vision and multimedia; robotics; and other topics in Science and Engineering. Prerequisites: CMPUT 204 or 275; MATH 125, 214; one of STAT 141, 151, 235 or 265 or SCI 151.
CMPUT 350 Advanced Games Programming Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course focuses on state-of-the-art AI and graphics programming for video games. Part 1 introduces C++, the language of choice for video game engines, emphasizing efficiency, safety, the Standard Template Library, and OpenGL. Part 2 on real time strategy deals with efficient pathfinding algorithms, planning, and scripting AI systems. Student projects give hands-on experience directly applicable to the video games industry. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201 or 275. May not be offered every year.
CMPUT 366 Intelligent Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to artificial intelligence focusing on techniques for building intelligent software systems and agents. Topics include search and problem-solving techniques, knowledge representation and reasoning, reasoning and acting under uncertainty, machine learning and neural networks. Recent applications such as planning and scheduling, diagnosis, decision support systems, and data mining. Prerequisites: CMPUT 204 or 275; one of STAT 141, 151, 235 or 265 or SCI 151.
CMPUT 379 Operating System Concepts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Processes: process state transitions; operations on processes; interrupt processing; parallel processing; multiprocessor considerations; resource allocation; critical sections and events; semaphores; deadlock: avoidance, detection, and recovery; memory management; virtual memory; paging and segmentation; page replacement strategies; working sets; demand paging; scheduling: levels, objectives, and criteria; scheduling algorithms; file system functions; file organization; space allocation; elements of operating systems security. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 and 204 or 275; one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212.
CMPUT 391 Database Management Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Database design and normalization theory, transaction management, query processing and optimization; support for special data types such as multimedia, spatial data, and XML documents, support for complex applications and data analysis such as data mining, data warehousing, and information retrieval. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 and CMPUT 204 or 275, and CMPUT 291.
CMPUT 396 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 397 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 398 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 399 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 401 Software Process and Product Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3). All phases of software development are reviewed from a process perspective. Best practices in software project and product development and management are introduced. Architectural and technological impacts on management. Group projects require specification and initial design or redesign of a software system. Prerequisites: CMPUT 301.
CMPUT 402 Software Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Software quality issues, metrics, verification, validation, and testing. Students working in project groups are required to complete the implementation of a system or significant subsystem and undertake unit, integration and acceptance testing. Industry standard assessment methods such as CMM or SPICE are introduced. Prerequisite: CMPUT 401.
CMPUT 403 Practical Algorithmics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The essence of computing science is in solving problems by computation. It may take anywhere from several minutes to several years from the initial posing of a problem specification to finally getting a working program. This course is interested in problems that can be solved within at most several hours by well prepared people. Prerequisites: Restricted to students participating in the programming contest. Any 300 level course, and consent of the instructor.
CMPUT 404 Web Applications and Architecture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to modern web architecture, from user-facing applications to machine-facing web-services. Topics include: the evolution of the Internet, relevant technologies and protocols, the architecture of modern web-based information systems, web data exchange and serialization, and service-oriented middleware. Prerequisites: CMPUT 301 and 391, or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 410 Web-Based Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Overview of Web technologies and applications. This course is project based and addresses issues such as web-based applications and databases design and implementation, XML data exchange and modeling, application component integration over the Web, security mechanisms, and Web Mining for intelligent web-based applications. Prerequisite: CMPUT 301 and 391 or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 411 Introduction to Computer Graphics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). 2-D and 3-D transformation; 3-D modeling and viewing; illumination models and shading methods; texture mapping; ray tracing. Prerequisites: CMPUT 204 or 275, 301; one of CMPUT 340, 418 or equivalent knowledge, and MATH 214. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPUT 311 and 411.
CMPUT 412 Experimental Mobile Robotics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A project-based course dealing with the design and implementation of mobile robots to accomplish specific tasks. Students work in groups and are introduced to concepts in sensor technologies, sensor data processing, motion control based on feedback and real-time programming. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 and 204, or 275; one of CMPUT 340, 418 or equivalent knowledge; MATH 214 and STAT 252 or 266.
CMPUT 414 Introduction to Multimedia Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Intro to basic principles and algorithms used in multimedia systems. Students obtain hands-on experience in issues relating to multimedia data representation, compression, processing, and animation. Topics will be selected from image and video coding and transmission, animation, human perceptual issues associated to multimedia technologies. Prerequisite: CMPUT 206 or 306 (Image Processing); CMPUT 307 or 411 (Graphics); knowledge of second year level MATH/STAT; JAVA, C, or equivalent programming or consent of instructor.
CMPUT 415 Compiler Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Compilers, interpreters, lexical analysis, syntax analysis, syntax directed translation, code generation, code optimization. Prerequisites: one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212, and a 300-level Computing Science course or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 428 Computer Vision Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the geometry and photometry of the 3D to 2D image formation process for the purpose of computing scene properties from camera images. Computing and analyzing motion in image sequences. Recognition of objects (what) and spatial relationships (where) from images and tracking of these in video sequences. Prerequisites: CMPUT 201 or 275; one of CMPUT 340, 418 or equivalent knowledge; one of MATH 101, 115 or 118, and one of MATH 102, 125 or 127.
CMPUT 429 Computer Systems and Architecture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A discussion of computer system design concepts with stress on modern ideas that have shaped the high-performance architecture of contemporary systems. Instruction sets, pipelining, instruction-level parallelism, register reuse, branch prediction, CPU control, and related concepts. Memory technologies, caches, I/O, high-performance backplanes and buses. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201 or 275; one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPUT 429 or CMPE 382.
CMPUT 463 Probabilistic Graphical Models Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs; including Bayesian Belief Nets, Markov Random Fields, etc.) now contribute significantly to many areas, including expert systems, computer perception (vision and speech), natural language interpretation, automated decision making, and robotics. This course provides an introduction to this field, describing semantics, inference and learning, as well as practical applications of these systems. Programming assignments will include hands-on experiments with various reasoning systems. Prerequisite: one of CMPUT 340, 418 or equivalent knowledge; one of STAT 141, 151, 235 or 265 or SCI 151; or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 466 Machine Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Learning is essential for many real-world tasks, including recognition, diagnosis, forecasting and data-mining. This course covers a variety of learning scenarios (supervised, unsupervised and partially supervised), as well as foundational methods for regression, classification, dimensionality reduction and modeling. Techniques such as kernels, optimization and probabilistic graphical models will typically be introduced. It will also provide the formal foundations for understanding when learning is possible and practical. Prerequisite: one of CMPUT 340, 418 or equivalent knowledge; one of STAT 141, 151, 235 or 265 or SCI 151; or consent of Instructor.
CMPUT 470 Computational Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). This is an interdisciplinary course covering areas in Computing Science, Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering. It covers three main areas. How do biological systems represent and process information at the level of single neurons? How is this information processed at the level of small neural networks? How this information is used to control body movements. Given the interdisciplinary nature of this course, we will ensure that students first learn the fundamental concepts of other the disciplines before they are applied. Prerequisites: one of PHYSL 372, PMCOL 371, PEDS 302, CMPUT 340, or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPUT 470 or NEURO 496.
CMPUT 474 Formal Languages, Automata, and Computability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formal grammars; relationship between grammars and automata; regular expressions; finite state machines; pushdown automata; Turing machines; computability; the halting problem; time and space complexity. Prerequisite: CMPUT 204 or 275, one of CMPUT 229, E E 380 or ECE 212 and one of MATH 225, 227, or 228 or consent of the instructor.
CMPUT 481 Parallel and Distributed Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an undergraduate-level introduction to parallel programming, parallel and distributed systems, and high-performance computing in science and engineering. Both shared-memory parallel computers and distributed-memory multicomputers (e.g., clusters) will be studied. Aspects of the practice of, and (some) research issues in, parallelism will be covered. There will be an emphasis on thread programming, data-parallel programming, and performance evaluation. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201, CMPUT 379, or permission of the instructor. May not be offered every year.
CMPUT 495 Honors Seminar Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 0-1s-0). This weekly seminar brings students, researchers, and practitioners together to examine a variety of topics, both foundational and leading edge. Content varies over successive offerings of the course. Required of all Honors Computing Science students during each Fall/Winter semester of their degree program. Prerequisite: Restricted to Honors Computing Science students, or consent of the instructor.
CMPUT 496 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 497 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
CMPUT 499 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). See Note (3) above.
Graduate Courses
CMPUT 500 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 501 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 510 Topics in Computational Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0).
CMPUT 511 Topics In Computer Graphics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 530 Topics in Computer Architecture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 551 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 563 Topics in Probabilistic Graphical Models Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 566 Topics in Machine Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3).
CMPUT 603 Teaching and Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 2-1s-0). A description of computing science research, with emphasis on research methodology. Includes techniques and conventions that are employed in various sub-areas of computing science, both for doing research and presenting results. Strategies and information for being an effective teaching assistant are also presented. Required for all graduate students.
CMPUT 604 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 605 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 606 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 607 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 608 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 609 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 610 Topics in Computer Graphics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 615 Topics in Image Processing and Vision Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 616 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 617 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 620 Topics in Programming Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 631 Robotics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 640 Topics in Computer Networks Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 644 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 650 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 651 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 654 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 655 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 656 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 657 Heuristic Search Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 659 Topics in Artificial Intelligence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 660 Topics in Software Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 664 Topics in Software Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 670 Topics in the Theory of Computation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 672 Algorithmic Graph Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 675 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 680 Topics in Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 681 Topics in Parallel and Distributed Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 690 Topics in Databases Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 691 Topics in Databases Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 692 Modern Database Management Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 694 Topics in Databases Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 697 Topics in Computing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
CMPUT 701 Essay in Computing Science I Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0). A major essay on an agreed topic.
#
Dance
DANCE
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Note: See also INT D 439 for a course which is offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as an option or as a course in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
DANCE 200 The Spectrum of Dance in Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-2). The theory and practice of dance as a human physical activity. Focus will be on the aesthetic, expressive, rhythmical dimensions of movement in a culture’s artistic and social life. The study will include movement content, techniques, improvisation, composition and performance in a variety of dance forms including modern/creative, social, jazz, and folk dance.
DANCE 340 Modern Dance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). The study of creative dance techniques, improvisation, composition, and performance through theory and practical experience.
DANCE 345 Modern Dance Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Development of personal movement skills in a variety of modern dance techniques combined with knowledge of movement and dance principles. Prerequisite: DAC 160 or 165, or DANCE 200 or 340, or equivalent, or consent of Faculty.
DANCE 431 Study of Dance for Children Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-2). Children’s dance from the perspective of the child as creator, performer and spectator. Opportunities to observe, work with and instruct children in creative dance will be provided. Prerequisite: PEDS 293 or 338 or consent of Faculty.
DANCE 446 Modern Dance Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice of modern dance improvisation and composition, principles of form and design, individual and group choreography, evaluation. Prerequisite: One of DANCE 200, 340, 431, or consent of Faculty.
DANCE 499 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An individualized course designed to offer an in-depth study in a dance area not covered by regular courses. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
#
Dance Activity
DAC
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Goals of DAC Level I
(1) Acquisition of basic skills required in the dance activity and an appreciation of how these skills are used in combination in performance and teaching situations.
(2) Development of the specific theoretical knowledge associated with terminology, history, sociocultural context, organizational aspects, basic strategies and tactics, technique dance anatomy and other movement concepts relevant to the dance activity.
(3) Basic dance pedagogy will be discussed and explored in theory, practice and research.
Notes
(1) Students enrolled in courses offered by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation must take responsibility for ensuring that they are physically and medically fit to be taking such courses. If a student has a physical or medical condition that may compromise their participation in a course, it is the student’s responsibility to so inform the instructor of that course. Students may contact the Faculty for further information on physical activity requirements and are encouraged to seek medical advice if necessary.
(2) Students are expected to attend the first class of any activity course appropriately dressed for activity participation.
Undergraduate Courses
DAC 125 Social Dance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skill in several variations and sequences of the foxtrot, waltz, tango, jive, rumba, and cha cha. Integral to this will be research into the historic and cultural evolution of each style, including the development of good partnering and rhythmic skills, with the understanding of teaching basic sequences to others. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of DAC 155 or DAC 125.
DAC 126 Jazz Dance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Introduction to jazz dance skills, body awareness, placement, locomotion and choreographed jazz dance while acquiring a theoretical knowledge base. The history and cultural roots of jazz dance will be addressed and with the expectation of teaching basic sequences to others. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of DAC 160 or DAC 126.
DAC 197 Selected Topics in Dance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Selected topics in Dance Activity, covering the historic and cultural aspect of the selected topic with a final project illustrating an instructional component. Note: Topics will vary from Term to Term. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
DAC 199 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An individualized course designed to offer an in-depth study in a dance activity not covered by regular courses. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
#
Dental Hygiene
D HYG
Department of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
D HYG 202 Head and Neck Anatomy Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 26 hours). Building on aspects of human anatomy, course emphasis is focused on head and neck anatomy. Prerequisite: D HYG 201 or equivalent human anatomy course.
D HYG 207 Dental Hygiene Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 39 hours). Overview of dental materials used in dental and dental hygiene practice. An introduction to specialties in dentistry and the role of a dental hygienist.
D HYG 208 Dental Hygiene Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). An introductory lecture course integrating the knowledge and practice of clinical dental hygiene. The course topics focus on a client-centered care model including assessment, diagnosis, planning, implementation and evaluation process for dental hygiene practice. Disease prevention and health maintenance are core philosophies that are integrated into all aspects of this course.
D HYG 209 Dental Hygiene Theory III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). A continuation from D HYG 208 in dental hygiene study that advances the student’s knowledge and application to practice. Prerequisite: D HYG 208
D HYG 212 Preclinical Dental Hygiene Œ5 (fi 10) (either term, 144 hours). A pre-clinical course integrating knowledge and clinical skills for dental hygiene practice. As a result of observation, discussion, demonstration and clinical application, the student will demonstrate comprehension and clinical competency according to specific criteria and course objectives.
D HYG 213 Dental Hygiene Practice I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 102 hours). A clinical course integrating the knowledge, practice, and skills of dental hygiene practice.
D HYG 221 Concepts and Communication for Health Behavior Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This is a lecture course with role-playing activities. Content includes concepts in dental hygiene and foundational communication theory for the healthcare professional. Skills include motivational interviewing, assertive communication methods and client centered care. Not available to students with credit in D HYG 220.
D HYG 230 Dental Anatomy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 13 hours). A lecture and self-study course that includes topics of tooth nomenclature, biologic considerations of tooth form and function; and permanent and deciduous teeth are studied in detail.
D HYG 240 Oral Radiology I Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 43 hours). A comprehensive didactic, pre-clinical and clinical course that deals with the production of x-rays, their interactions with matter, radiation biology and protection, the appearances of normal anatomy on radiographs and common abnormalities seen on radiographs made in the practice of dental hygiene. Pre-clinical and clinical sessions will introduce students to the basic techniques of intraoral radiography and pantomography.
D HYG 250 Human Anatomy Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 26 hours). An introductory course in general human anatomy. Emphasis will be on anatomical structures as they relate to function and physiology.
D HYG 251 Anatomical Structures for Dental Hygiene Practice Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 30 hours). The first part of the course focuses on tooth nomenclature, biologic considerations of function and tooth anatomy. The second part of the course builds on aspects of human anatomy, with specific emphasis on head and neck anatomy.
D HYG 255 Oral Health Sciences I Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 52 hours). A modular designed course that provides an introduction to concepts in oral health relevant to dental hygiene practice. Topics include but are not limited to dental materials, cariology and nutrition, ADPIE, care planning for dental hygiene services, ethics and professionalism.
D HYG 256 Oral Health Sciences II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). Introduction to the client-centered care model, the dental hygiene process of care model and other foundational theory in preparation for the delivery of dental hygiene services.
D HYG 260 Dental Hygiene Theory and Practice I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 210 hours). An introductory clinical course integrating the knowledge, attitudes, and skills of dental hygiene practice through simulated learning and patient care. May include external practicum observation and participation.
D HYG 270 Behavioural Sciences I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 39 hours). Foundational concepts for community health and dental hygiene practice are introduced. Motivational Interviewing, therapeutic communication theory and conflict resolution skills are developed. Includes case- based scenarios and role-playing activities.
D HYG 313 Dental Hygiene Practice II Œ13 (fi 26) (two term, 396 hours). A clinical and seminar dental hygiene course that focuses on comprehensive dental hygiene care and education for clients with chronic and acute variances in oral health. Following an evidence-based decision making framework, the course advances the student’s application of the client- centered care model including assessment, diagnosis, planning, implementation and evaluation processes for dental hygiene practice. Prerequisite: D HYG 213.
D HYG 316 Dental Hygiene Care for Complex Clients Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 39 hours). A lecture course that emphasizes client centered management and care of clients with complex needs including specific needs for geriatric clients. Complex needs of clients may involve the physically, mentally , sensory and medically compromised. Concepts learned in theory will be applied in clinical settings in D HYG 313.
D HYG 317 Evidence for Dental Hygiene Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 39 hours). A team instructed course that provides students with a framework for critiquing scientific literature and the implications for dental hygiene practice. Students conduct a capstone project to address a clinical research question and present their project to peers following a scientific meeting format. This course also discusses many issues related to the practice of dental hygiene as well as advancing the understanding and application of ethical decision making in practice.
D HYG 320 Health Education and Leadership Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 26 hours). This course provides teaching and leadership skills for the dental hygienist through lecture and a teaching practicum. Topics include learning theory, teaching methods, health literacy, cultural competence and public speaking. Teaching to an audience is practiced in two different community settings.
D HYG 322 Population Health, Health Promotion and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This course prepares students with an understanding of the factors that affect the health and well-being of the population. Students will learn about the determinants of health and suggest strategies for working with other disciplines and community agencies to affect health outcomes. The course demonstrates applied public health principles in today’s dental public health practice. Concepts of dental public health practice, examples of current programming in Alberta and Canada, and evidence-based public health prevention will be studied in context of the dental public health practice model.
D HYG 326 Periodontology for the Dental Hygienist Œ2.5 (fi 5) (two term, 38 hours). Periodontology is a foundational and integral part of dental hygiene practice. This course provides knowledge in the science of Periodontology, as well as an emphasis on non-surgical and surgical periodontal therapies. With the knowledge gained through the integration of lectures, case studies and class activities, students will be able to assess, diagnose, plan, implement and evaluate patient centred evidence based dental hygiene therapy.
D HYG 329 External Rotation Œ2.5 (fi 5) (two term, 75 hours). Each student will spend two weeks at an external placement. Students may provide health promotional programs including preventive dental hygiene therapies, classroom education and community interventions. This program aims to provide intensive exposure to dental hygiene practice both within and external to traditional dental practice settings.
D HYG 340 Oral Radiology II Œ1 (fi 2) (two term, 24 hours). A practical course in which students gain competency in a variety of digital intraoral and extraoral radiography techniques on mannequins and clients. Students interpret and report on radiographic images related to dental hygiene treatment.
D HYG 355 Oral Health Sciences III Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 42 hours). A lecture course that emphasizes client centered care of clients with complex needs across the lifespan.
D HYG 356 Oral Health Sciences IV Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 55 hours). This course provides further understanding and critical analysis of periodontal diseases. Includes content related to pain management, most specifically agents for local anesthesia and resulting processes.
D HYG 360 Dental Hygiene Theory and Practice II Œ12 (fi 24) (two term, 340 hours). A clinical course that prepares students for delivering comprehensive patient care for clients with chronic and acute variances in oral health. The course includes delivery of local anesthesia. Learning activities occur in a simulated laboratory, the school dental clinic and in alternative practice settings external to university campus. Prerequisite: D HYG 260.
D HYG 370 Behavioural Sciences II Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 61 hours). This course includes aspects of the dental hygiene service competencies including health promotion, disease prevention, oral health education, advocacy and policy use. Foundational to these topics are principles based on the dental hygiene core competencies. Includes practical experiences in community settings.
D HYG 386 Anaesthesia Œ2.5 (fi 5) (either term, 52 hours). A didactic and lab course covering anatomy, physiology, and pharmacology of different anaesthetics. Local anaesthetic techniques covering all types of infiltration and intraoral blocks from the major component of the clinic-laboratory sessions. Students will also be able to describe the techniques, drug reactions and complications involving the use of local anaesthetics and have practical experience in the administration of local anaesthetic drugs.
D HYG 413 Advanced Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 108 hours). This practicum and seminar course may encompass hospital, community, and/or dental hygiene practice. Students may be placed in various practicum locations.
D HYG 414 Addictions Awareness and Interventions for Tobacco Cessation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). An overview of the physiology, pharmacology and psychology of substance dependence/addiction for the health care professional. Focus is on developing knowledge, attitudes and skills for tobacco control initiatives and tobacco treatment interventions. About 9 hours of online self- study is required.
D HYG 417 Practice Management : Small Business and Entrepreneurship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This distance course will provide an opportunity for students to explore and articulate their own philosophy of dental hygiene practice. Additionally, this course will provide an opportunity to explore various facets of practice management in an area of special interest to the student.
D HYG 418 Long Term Care and Dental Hygiene Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This distance course will focus on the development of dental hygiene care in continuing and long-term care facilities. Approaches to patient-centred care and role of the family will be explored. Students will be involved in experiential learning activities and case based group discussions.
D HYG 422 Health Information and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This course examines the role policy plays in influencing general and oral health in a community setting. Students will utilize the Dental Hygiene Process of Care (assess, plan, implement and evaluate) as a framework for designing a community oral health plan to meet an identified need. Also offered as a distance course pursuant to enrolment quota.
D HYG 430 Individual Study in Dental Hygiene Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). Designed to allow the undergraduate student to independently pursue a topic in dental hygiene. A course advisor will be assigned. May be taken twice for credit. Prerequisites: D HYG 468 or comparable introductory research course and consent of Program Director.
D HYG 431 Topics in Dental Hygiene Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). The topics will focus on any aspect of dental hygiene practice and may vary from year to year depending on current and relevant issues arising in the dental hygiene profession.
D HYG 440 Advocacy for Change in Healthcare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). Provides an overview of the professional, social, political and global trends and issues affecting health and health care delivery. Through the application of a framework for planned change, this course will demonstrate how health care professionals can act as change agents in society. Also offered as a distance course pursuant to enrolment quota.
D HYG 455 Oral Health Sciences V Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This course will further advance knowledge and application of patient care in alternative practice settings as well as aspects of practice management in alternative settings.
D HYG 456 Oral Health Sciences VI Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This course will further develop leadership skills and capacity for research use culminating in a capstone experience.
D HYG 460 Dental Hygiene Theory and Practice III Œ8 (fi 16) (two term, 250 hours). A clinical practice course with increased practicum experiences in alternative settings with diverse individuals and population groups. Students will be scheduled in numerous external settings as well as clinics within the school dental clinic.
D HYG 468 Introduction to Research Methods and Critical Appraisal Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This distance course will provide an introduction to research methods and develop student skills in critical evaluation of quantitative and qualitative studies. This course will also examine the principles of research ethics, the appropriate application of statistics and identify how research is applied to support practice decisions.
D HYG 470 Behavioural Sciences III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 78 hours). This course further advances concepts specific to the dental hygiene service competencies including health promotion, disease prevention, and oral health education. An overview of the physiology, pharmacology and psychology of substance dependence/addiction is provided. Theory and skills for motivating health behavior change are developed. Includes practical experiences in community settings where students can apply interprofessional learning in areas involving advocacy and policy relevant to dental hygiene practice.
D HYG 480 Behavioural Sciences IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 39 hours). This course provides an overview of the professional, social, political and global trends and issues affecting health and health care delivery. The role of policy in influencing changes in general and oral health in the community will also be explored. Students will examine the role of health care professionals as advocates for change in health policy.
Graduate Courses
D HYG 501 Individual Directed Reading and Research in Dental Hygiene Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). May be repeated. Open to dental hygiene graduate students who wish to pursue individual reading and research studies with an academic staff member within the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. Students are expected to produce a manuscript to submit for publication. Prerequisites: consent of the graduate student’s supervisor.
#
Dentistry
DDS
Department of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
DDS 506 Gastroenterology and Nutrition Œ5 (fi 10) (either term, 6 weeks). An integrated course covering nutrition, gastrointestinal physiology, pathophysiology and anatomy. Related surgical, paediatric and geriatric topics will also be addressed. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 507 Neurosciences and Organs of Special Senses Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 7 weeks). Fundamental Clinical Neurosciences taught in an integrated fashion. Involves instruction in subject areas related to the head and neck, including Neuroanatomy, Neurophysiology, Neuropathology, Neuropharmacology, Neuroradiology, Neurology, Neurosurgery, Rehabilitation Medicine, Otorhinolaryngology, and Ophthalmology. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 508 Oncology Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 2 weeks). Principles and concepts of clinical oncology. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 509 Pre-Clinical Practice of Dentistry I Œ15 (fi 30) (two term, 39 weeks). An introduction to the art and science of clinical practice. Building on the foundation of epidemiology, bacteriology, and gross and microscopic anatomy of the teeth and jaws, students develop an understanding of the genesis of the carious process, and study the restoration of carious teeth and the related rationale. An introduction to the radiographic imaging process and interpretation of radiographs. Students use restoration materials and learn their physical and chemical properties. The principles of occlusion are also introduced.
DDS 510 Patient-Centred Care Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 55 hours). A discussion of dental skills which may be generalized across different disease states and different specialties. Topics include epidemiology, evidence-based dentistry and public health, history-taking and clinical skills in patients of all age groups and backgrounds, ethics, family issues, health in specific sections of the community and related areas. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 514 Anatomy (Dental) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 79 hours). Coronal, radicular and pupal morphology of the primary and permanent dentitions. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 517 Psychiatry Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 4 weeks). Psychiatry is the medical specialty devoted to the study, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of mental disorders. Each mental health disorder will be explored in terms of definition, epidemiology, etiology, pathophysiology, signs, symptoms, investigations, treatment and prognosis.
DDS 518 Oral Biology I Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 70 hours). Development, histology, and comparative anatomy of the craniofacial complex and dental tissues. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 520 Patient-Centred Care Œ4 (fi 8) (variable, 60 hours). A continuation of DDS 510, which involves further discussion of dental skills which may be generalized across different disease states and different specialties. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 523 Musculoskeletal System Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 7 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology and management in the musculosketal system. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 529 Pre-Clinical Practice of Dentistry II Œ25 (fi 50) (two term, 39 weeks). Students begin studying all phases of clinical dentistry including diagnosis and treatment planning, anaesthesia, periodontics, endodontics, fixed, operative, radiology and removable prosthodontics and orthodontics. An introduction to ethics in dentistry. Students are introduced to the clinic, and limited diagnosis and treatment of patients begin.
DDS 532 Oral Biology II Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 66 hours). A multidisciplinary course that examines the unique physiology, biochemistry and nutritional requirements of the oral cavity. Topics include functions of the periodontal tissues, the temporomandibular joint, mastication, swallowing, speech, special reflexes involving cranial nerves, receptors of the stomatognathic system, and salivary glands and the role of saliva in caries. Oral manifestations of metabolic disease, the physiology of pain, and the role of nutrition in the development of oral tissues and the maintenance of oral health will also be discussed. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 533 Oral Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 40 hours). The diagnosis, pathology and treatment of common diseases of the oral and maxillofacial structures. Open only to students registered in the DDS program.
DDS 541 Dental Pharmacology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 15 hours). An introduction to the principles of pharmacology including mechanisms of drug action; pharmacokinetics and drug metabolism; and mechanisms of drug interactions and adverse drug reactions. These principles will be applied to groups of drugs acting on various organ systems of the body, representative drugs being selected whenever possible for their physiological and clinical significance to the practice of dentistry. Particular emphasis will be placed on anaesthetics, antacoids, autonomic drugs and drugs with selective toxicity employed in infections and malignancies.
DDS 545 Clinical Practice I Œ52 (fi 104) (two term, 39 weeks). An introduction to the art and science of clinical dentistry in the patient care setting. Utilizing a patient-centered approach, students develop the skills to diagnose and develop a treatment plan addressing patients’ needs; to deliver basic restorative dentistry; to perform basic endodontic procedures; to assist in oral surgery; to provide periodontal therapy from basic to more advanced needs; to treat pediatric patients; to deliver basic removable prosthodontic services; to provide basic fixed prosthodontic services that may incorporate dental implantology; and to manage basic orthodontic needs of patients. Diagnostic services such as radiology are incorporated during the diagnosis and treatment. Students learn to manage ethical dilemmas and provide care according to existing codes of ethics. Clinical observation may require off-site rotations. Students gain their clinical experience at intramural and extramural sites.
DDS 547 Geriatrics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 15 hours). An introductory course describing the needs of the elderly. The course will examine the changing population balance in Canada involving both medical and dental aspects of people over 60 years of age.
DDS 555 Practice Management Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 15 hours). This course introduces the third-year dental students to practice management topics and concepts necessary for today’s successful practice of dentistry. These topics include financial planning, banking, dental office records, different modes of practice, marketing, and time management. The emphasis is to achieve an awareness of how these topics affect a dentist in today’s society.
DDS 565 Clinical Practice II Œ50 (fi 100) (two term, 30 weeks). A clinical course building on Clinical Practice I with emphasis on more complex patient needs involving all disciplines. Students perform oral surgery procedures as the prime operator. Students are also assigned to external programs such as the satellite clinics. Clinical observation may require off-site rotations. A hospital rotation is included (University of Alberta Hospitals and Glenrose Hospital). Students deliver comprehensive dental care in a Clinical Teaching Unit.
DDS 800 Special Registration =OPEN-LIMITED Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Dentistry undergraduate and postgraduate students who have been admitted to the University of Alberta Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry as a Visiting Student in accordance with the Faculty guidelines will be required to register in this course for the purpose of entitlement to registration in the Alberta Dental Association and College Education Register if applicable.
DDS 829 Introduction to DDS Advanced Placement Œ12 (fi 38) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Students begin studying all phases of clinical dentistry including diagnosis and treatment planning, anaesthesia, periodontics, endodontics, operative dentistry, prosthodontics and orthodontics. Students receive an introduction to ethics in dentistry. Students perform tasks mainly in a pre- clinical (laboratory) environment and have a brief introduction to the clinic with limited diagnosis and treatment of patients. Offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Restricted to candidates registered as Special Students in the DDS Advanced Placement Program.
#
Dentistry
DENT
Department of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Graduate Courses
DENT 502 Oral Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). A review of diseases of the oral and maxillofacial region and an exploration of recently acquired knowledge pertaining to them.
DENT 503 Oral Medicine I Œ9 (fi 18) (two term, variable). Provides general pathophysiological and clinical foundations for Oral Medicine students. The content includes lectures, case- based seminars, and mentored clinical experiences. Special emphasis will be on the oral manifestations of systemic disease and on the dental management of medically-complex patients.
DENT 504 Oral Medicine Clinics I Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, variable). Mentored clinical experience in the assessment and evidence-based management of oral lesions and oral manifestations of systemic diseases. Will include off-service experiences in relevant medical disciplines.
DENT 530 Orthodontic Techniques and Biomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A comprehensive overview of the fundamentals of biomechanics in orthodontic treatment. Involves both the theoretical and practical application of biomechanical principles to orthodontic problem resolution through classroom and laboratory instruction.
DENT 532 Growth and Development Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 2-0-0). A detailed review of the postnatal growth and development of human craniofacial structures. Longitudinal and cross sectional growth data are presented. (Course offered in alternate years).
DENT 540 Orthodontic Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 175 hours). Selected orthodontically related theoretical and practical topics along with orthodontic case management presentations are discussed in both seminar and preclinical formats.
DENT 541 Orthodontic Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Applied clinical education and experience is obtained through supervised management of selected orthodontic cases.
DENT 542 Research Methodology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 30 hours). Review of scientific methodology and direction of students in the techniques of evaluating dental literature. A research proposal or literature review is required as part of this course.
DENT 543 Introduction to Research Methods and Data Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This introductory course will prepare students to manage research studies and process data for analysis and interpretation. The course will include a collection of short didactic sessions that will be vodcasted, and interactivities both online and in-person.
DENT 545 Special Topics in Oral Health Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Content varies from year to year but is typically in the format of interactive discussions that are facilitated by experts in the area. Topics are announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript will carry a title descriptive of the content. May be repeated.
DENT 551 Introduction to Applied Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Analysis of variance, multiple linear regressions, measures of association and agreement, logistic regression, and non-parametric methods. The concepts will be illustrated by problems in the dental and medical sciences. Applications to real data will be emphasized through the use of SPSS.
DENT 552 Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Multivariate analysis of variance, repeated measures, multivariate linear regression, principal components, discriminate analysis, cluster analysis, and multidimensional scaling will be studied. The concepts will be illustrated by problems in dentistry and the medical sciences. Each student will submit a written report and present a research project focusing on these statistical methods. Applications to real data will be emphasized through the use of SPSS. Prerequisite: DENT 551.
DENT 562 TMD/Orofacial Pain Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, variable). Seminars in the pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of temporomandibular disorders and other orofacial pain disorders.
DENT 563 Temporomandibular Disorders Orofacial Pain Clinics Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Applied clinical program in which clinical education and experience is obtained through supervised management of patients presenting with temporomandibular disorders and/or other orofacial pains.
DENT 565 Evidence Based Dentistry Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, variable). This course focuses on the general principles of evidence based dentistry. It will cover some basic principles of epidemiology, formulation of the clinical question, search and acquisition of available scientific evidence, critical appraisal and application of evidence in a dentistry context. A final written assignment is a course requirement.
DENT 566 Systematic Reviews in Dentistry Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, variable). This course focuses on the general principles of Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis in Dentistry. It will cover principles, procedures, problems and limitations in Systematic Reviews. Different types of Systematic Reviews would be analyzed. Use of Meta-Analysis as a statistical tool in Systematic Reviews will also be covered. Having a systematic review ready for submission to a peer reviewed journal is a course requirement. Prerequisite: DENT 565.
DENT 570 Periodontology Fundamentals Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). A comprehensive overview of the fundamentals of periodontal disease, etiology, diagnosis, treatment and maintenance. Involves both the theoretical and practical application of periodontal disease management and resolution.
DENT 571 Implantology Fundamentals Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). A comprehensive overview of the fundamentals of implant dentistry. Involves both the theoretical and practical application of implant dentistry management as well as implant related bone and soft tissue manipulation.
DENT 572 Periodontology Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 175 hours). Selected periodontology related theoretical and practical topics along with periodontology case management presentations are discussed in both seminar and preclinical formats.
DENT 573 Periodontology Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Applied clinical education and experience is obtained through supervised management of selected periodontology and implant cases.
DENT 601 Seminars in Oral Health Sciences Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). Seminars will focus on the major areas of research of Oral Health Sciences. Students must present one seminar on topics related to their field of research. Not required for MSc students in Oral Medicine and Orthodontics.
DENT 603 Advanced Oral Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, variable). A microscope-based course to help the student understand clinicopathologic correlations in diagnosis and evidence-based management of oral disease. This will make use of archived study cases as well as review of current surgical specimens from the Oral Medicine Clinic. Course offered in alternate years.
DENT 604 Oral Medicine Seminars II Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, variable). Seminars (including Journal Club) focusing upon the assessment and evidence-based management of oral diseases or oral manifestations of systemic diseases. Prerequisite: DENT 504
DENT 605 Oral Medicine Clinics II Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, variable). Mentored clinical experience in the assessment and evidence-based management of oral lesions or oral manifestations of systemic diseases. Will include off-service experiences in relevant medical disciplines.
DENT 606 Pharmacotherapeutics in Oral Medicine Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, variable). A seminar series that will stress the pharmacological basis for selection and use of drugs as therapeutic agents in the management of oral diseases and orofacial pain disorders. Special emphasis will be placed on clinically significant drug interactions as they apply to the various groups of agents discussed. Course offered in alternate years.
DENT 607 Advanced Oral Radiology Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, variable). This lecture and seminar course will review the application of the various imaging modalities, including advanced modalities, in oral and maxillofacial radiology. Emphasis will be placed on the interpretation of abnormalities of the oral and maxillofacial region that may be encountered in the dental specialties.
DENT 640 Orthodontic Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 175 hours). Second year seminar and preclinical presentations. Requires successful completion of DENT 540.
DENT 641 Orthodontic Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Second year applied clinical educational program. Requires successful completion of DENT 541.
DENT 663 Temporomandibular Disorders/Orofacial Pain Clinics Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Second year applied clinical program in which clinical education and experience is obtained through supervised management of patients presenting with temporomandibular disorders and/or other orofacial pains. Prerequisite: DENT 563.
DENT 672 Periodontology Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Second year seminar and preclinical presentations. Prerequisite: DENT 572.
DENT 673 Periodontology Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Second year applied clinical educational program. Prerequisite: DENT 573.
DENT 704 Oral Medicine Seminars III Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, variable). Seminars (including Journal Club) focusing upon the assessment and evidence-based management of oral diseases or oral manifestations of systemic diseases
DENT 705 Oral Medicine Clinics III Œ2.5 (fi 5) (two term, variable). Mentored clinical experience in the assessment and evidence-based management of oral lesions or oral manifestations of systemic diseases. Will include off-service experiences in relevant medical disciplines.
DENT 740 Orthodontic Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 175 hours). Third year seminar and preclinical presentations. Requires successful completion of DENT 640.
DENT 741 Orthodontic Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Third year applied clinical educational program. There will be 3 one-week internships as part of this course. Requires successful completion of DENT 641.
DENT 763 Temporomandibular Disorders/Orofacial Pain Clinics III Œ2.5 (fi 5) (two term, variable). Third year applied clinical program in which clinical education and experience is obtained through supervised management of patients presenting with temporomandibular disorders and/or other orofacial pains. Prerequisite: DENT 663.
DENT 772 Periodontology Seminars Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Third year seminar and preclinical presentations. Prerequisite: DENT 672.
DENT 773 Periodontology Clinics Œ10 (fi 20) (two term, variable). Third year applied clinical educational program. Prerequisite: DENT 673.
#
Dentistry/Medicine
DMED
Department of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
DMED 511 Foundations of Medicine and Dentistry Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, 12 weeks). Focus on integrating basic principles of medical and biological sciences as the foundation for the Medicine and Dentistry curriculum. Open only to students registered in the MD or DDS program.
DMED 513 Endocrine System Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 6 weeks). An examination of the endocrine system in health and disease, with particular reference to the mechanisms of disturbances in the endocrine system, and the management of these conditions. Open only to students registered in the MD or DDS program.
DMED 514 Cardiovascular, Pulmonary and Renal Systems Œ11 (fi 22) (either term, 14 weeks). The normal function of the heart and blood vessels, lungs and kidney, the changes in these functions which occur in disease and the management of the conditions which result from such changes in function. Open only to students registered in the MD or DDS program.
#
Design
DES
Department of Art and Design Faculty of Arts
Note: Because presence at lectures and seminars, participation in classroom discussion, and the completion of assignments are important components of most courses, regular attendance is expected.
This applies particularly to studio courses where attendance is a factor in grading.
Students are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite course(s) with a minimum averaged grade of B. Registration may be withheld in cases where the averaged grade in prerequisite courses is below a B. Bachelor of Fine Arts and Bachelor of Design students in Art and Design have priority registration in all Art and Design studio courses. Registration in remaining spaces is based upon academic performance in required prerequisite courses.
Undergraduate Courses
DES 135 Design Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based introduction to the conceptual and practical concerns of the design disciplines. Two- and three-dimensional design-related studies. Note: ART 134 and DES 135 are required prerequisites for senior level ART or DES courses. Not open to students with credit in ART 131 or ART 132.
DES 138 Design Fundamentals I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based introduction to the conceptual and practical concerns of the design disciplines. Two- and three-dimensional design related studies. Note: Restricted to BFA and BDes students.
DES 139 Design Fundamentals II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Further study of the conceptual and practical concerns of the design disciplines. Two- and three-dimensional design-related studies. Note: Restricted to BFA and BDes students. Prerequisite: DES 138.
DES 300 Foundations of Industrial Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the principles, methods and techniques of industrial design. Studies of three-dimensional design address concept, form and function in a social/environmental context and involve projects combining theory and practice in two and three dimensions. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138. Corequisite: DES 302 and consent of Department. BDes Students must enroll in DES 301 in second term. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 370.
DES 301 Foundations of Industrial Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Continuing study of the principles, methods and techniques of industrial design. Studies of three-dimensional design address concept, form and function in a social/environmental context and involve projects combining theory and practice in two and three dimensions. Prerequisite: DES 300.
DES 302 Introduction to Visual Presentation I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Introductory studies in models and graphics based projects implementing the materials and processes of traditional visualization methods and media. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 300 and consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 371 or DES 375.
DES 303 Introduction to Visual Presentation II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Continuing studies in models and graphics based projects implementing the materials and processes of traditional visualization methods and media. Prerequisite: DES 302. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 301 and consent of the Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 371 or DES 376.
DES 337 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Introductory Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138, and consent of Department. Formerly DES 339.
DES 338 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Introductory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135 or ART 136 and DES 138 and consent of Department.
DES 384 Introduction to Integrative Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Introductory studies include 3-D model building, application of type, symbols and signage in 3-D environments, materials and fabrication and printing processes. Pre or corequisites: DES 300 or DES 393 (when offered in the fall term or DES 301 or 394 (when offered in the winter term). Not to be taken by students with credit in both DES 300 and DES 393.
DES 393 Foundations of Visual Communication Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to the principles of visual communication design. Study of communication concerns through the use of photography and typography. Emphasis on appropriateness, clarity, expression and description. Introduction to information and publication design problems. Prerequisites: ART 134 and DES 135, or ART 136 and DES 138, and consent of department. BDes students must enroll in DES 394 in second term. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 390.
DES 394 Foundations of Visual Communication Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Continuing study of the principles of visual communication design. Study of communication concerns through the integration of photography and typography. Emphasis on appropriateness, clarity, expression and description. Introduction to information and publication design problems. Introduction to the computer as a tool for language and visual communication. Prerequisites: DES 393, and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 390.
DES 395 Introduction to Form, Visual Elements and Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Structure, representation and expression. Creation, observation and categorization. Form, color and tone systems in contemporary and historical design, and in the environment. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 393 and consent of the Department.
DES 396 Introduction to Research and Theory in Design Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Introduction to information gathering methods, literature search and empirical research. Problem identification and definition. Purposes, goals, design and evaluation methods. Communication theory. Corequisite: DES 394 and consent of the Department.
DES 400 Intermediate Industrial Design Principles and Practices I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Subject areas include research methods and the design processes; communication skills and collaborative dynamics, human factors, the psychology of design, material properties and applications for fabrication and production, market considerations. Projects are 2-D, 3-D and computer-based. Prerequisites: DES 302 and DES 303 and consent of Department. BDes Students must enroll in DES 401 in second term. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 470.
DES 401 Intermediate Industrial Design Principles and Practices II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Subject areas include research methods and the design processes; communication skills and collaborative dynamics, human factors, the psychology of design, material properties and applications for fabrication and production, market considerations. Projects are 2-D, 3-D and computer-based. Prerequisites: DES 400 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 470.
DES 402 Product Design Principles and Practices I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). A studio-based course which implements design principles and practices with a focus on their application to product design for batch production and mass production. Experimentation and concept development with computer technology. 2-D media and 3-D models and mock-ups. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 400 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 475.
DES 403 Furniture Design Principles and Practices I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). A studio-based course which implements design principles and practices with a focus on their application to furniture design for batch production and mass production. Experimentation and concept development with computer technology. 2-D media and 3-D models and prototypes. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 400 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 477.
DES 425 Word and Image: Intermediate Projects in Printmaking for Designers and Artists Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of the multiple relationships between word and image generated through consideration of text. Prerequisites: ART 322 and DES 394. Note: Registration priority will be given to BDesign Printmaking Route students. Not open to students who have successfully completed ART 425.
DES 437 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Intermediate Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Formerly DES 439.
DES 438 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Intermediate Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
DES 483 Seminar on Design Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Contemporary design issues in the fields of theory, criticism, history, professional practice and social concerns. Restricted to third-year Bachelor of Design students. Prerequisite(s): ART H 209 and/or consent of Department.
DES 484 Integrative Design Principles and Practices I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based course which integrates Visual Communication Design and Industrial Design concepts and practices. Individual and group projects address subjects including: signs, symbols, and communication; as well as products, packaging, and graphics. Pre- or corequisites: DES 300 and 393 or DES 300 and 384, or DES 393 and 384 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 482.
DES 485 Integrative Design Principles and Practices II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Studio-based course which integrates Visual Communication Design and Industrial Design concepts and practices. Individual and group projects address subjects such as point of purchase displays and retail environments, combining 2-D and 3-D considerations. Pre- or corequisites: DES 301 and 394 or DES 301 and 384, or DES 394 and 384 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 482.
DES 493 Concepts and Systems in Visual Communication Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Systematic approaches to typographic, graphic and diagrammatic communication, image creation and manipulation. Project management and research. Prerequisites: DES 394 and consent of Department. BDES Students must enroll in DES 494 in second term. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 490.
DES 494 Concepts and Systems in Visual Communication Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Systematic approaches to typographic, graphic and diagrammatic communication, image creation and manipulation. Project management and research. Prerequisites: DES 493 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 490.
DES 495 The Image I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Further studies in the use of the photographic image in the design context. The communicative function of the image. Representation, description, expression and persuasion. History and theory of the use of images. Prerequisites or corequisites: DES 493 and consent of Department.
DES 496 The Image II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Complex image creation for communicational purposes mainly in electronic media. Introduction to criticism. Prerequisite: DES 493 and corequisite: DES 494 and consent of Department.
DES 497 Advanced Typography Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Typography in the context of language communication. Design of letterforms. The study of notation schemes. The history of letterforms, history of printing and book design. Corequisite DES 493 and consent of Department.
DES 498 Information Design Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Text, tables, charts, diagrams and electronic displays. User-machine interaction: perception and cognition. Visual presentation of abstract and quantitative information. Corequisite: DES 494 and consent of Department.
DES 500 The Practice of Industrial Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Subject areas include design and culture; human factors; social, environmental and economic implications of design; appropriate technologies; production considerations processes; communication skills and collaborative dynamics; human factors; the psychology of design; material properties and applications for fabrication and production; market considerations. Projects are 2-D, 3-D and computer-based. Prerequisites: DES 401 and consent of Department. BDes Students must enroll in DES 501 in second term. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 570.
DES 501 The Practice of Industrial Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Subject areas include design and culture; human factors; social, environmental and economic implications of design; appropriate technologies; production considerations processes; communication skills and collaborative dynamics; human factors; the psychology of design; material properties and applications for fabrication and production; market considerations. Projects are 2-D, 3-D and computer-based. Prerequisites: DES 500 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 570.
DES 502 Product Design Applications and Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). A studio-based course in which projects address the requirements of special user groups and specific markets with special consideration of the production capabilities of western Canada. Computer-aided design and manufacturing will be the focus of at least one project. Prerequisite: DES 402. Corequisite: DES 500 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 575.
DES 503 Furniture Design Applications and Production Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). A studio-based course in which projects address the requirements of special user groups and specific markets with special consideration of the production capabilities of western Canada. Computer-aided design and manufacturing will be the focus of at least one project. Prerequisite: DES 403. Corequisite: DES 501 and consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in DES 576.
DES 525 Word and Image: Advanced Projects in Printmaking for Designers and Artists Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of the multiple relationships between word and image generated through consideration of text. Prerequisite: DES 425 or ART 425. Note: Registration priority will be given to BDesign Printmaking Route students. Not open to students who have successfully completed ART 525.
DES 537 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Advanced Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Formerly DES 539.
DES 538 Special Projects in Studio Disciplines: Advanced Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Normally offered in spring/summer. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DES 584 Integrative Design Applications I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). A 2-D/3-D studio-based course in which projects address the research, development and fabrication requirements of educational and interpretive design, with special consideration of technological and cultural contexts. Prerequisites: DES 484 and/or DES 485 and consent of Department.
DES 585 Integrative Design Applications II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). A 2-D/3-D studio-based course in which projects address the research, development and fabrication requirements of commercial applications of design in specific settings, with special consideration of technological and cultural contexts. Prerequisites: DES 484 and/or DES 485 and consent of Department.
DES 586 Design Practicum I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Design internship in design offices, industry, museums and other appropriate professional hosts and venues, bridging formal education and professional practice. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DES 587 Design Practicum II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Design internship in design offices, industry, museums and other appropriate professional hosts and venues, bridging formal education and professional practice. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DES 593 The Practice of Graphic Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Applied practical projects and complex design systems. Problem definition, strategic planning, project management and design evaluation. Project brief and production specifications, professional practice, procedures, codes of ethics, pricing and intellectual property. Prerequisites: DES 494 and consent of Department. BDes students must enroll in DES 594 in second term. Note: not open to students with credit in DES 590.
DES 594 The Practice of Graphic Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Applied practical projects and complex design systems. Problem definition, strategic planning, project management and design evaluation. Project brief and production specifications, professional practice, procedures, codes of ethics, pricing and intellectual property. Prerequisites: DES 593 and consent of Department. Note: not open to students with credit in DES 590.
DES 595 Communication Design for Interactive Media I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Design issues in new communication media. Open information structures and networks as complex hierarchical systems. Internet as an information resource, research tool and mass communication media. Navigation, interaction and interface design in hypermedia. Corequisite: DES 593 and Prerequisite consent of Department.
DES 596 Communication Design for Interactive Media II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Design for information, education and instruction using multimedia, Navigation, interface design in the context of human-machine interaction. Complex information systems, project planning and development strategies. Prerequisite DES 593 and consent of Department and corequisite DES 594. Not open to students with credit in DES 595 prior to 2007.
DES 597 Design Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Project and office management. Design methods and evaluation, systems theory, writing for design. Introduction to marketing and social marketing, motivational and audience studies. Prerequisite or corequisite: DES 593 and consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
DES 600 Concepts, Analysis and Criticism in Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0).
DES 601 Concepts, Analysis and Criticism in Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0).
DES 630 Seminar in Related Disciplines Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
DES 680 Theory and Research in Design Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0).
DES 681 Theory and Research in Design Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0).
DES 683 Seminar on Contemporary Design Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Issues in the fields of theory, criticism, history, professional practice and social concerns. Restricted to Master of Design students. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
DES 685 Special Topics in Design Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Drama
DRAMA
Department of Drama Faculty of Arts
Note: For Theatre Design courses taught by the Department of Drama please see T DES Course Listings.
Undergraduate Courses
DRAMA 101 Introduction to Theatre Art =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The origins and development of theatre art; introduction to theatre aesthetics. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for students section of the Calendar. Note: Not normally to be taken by BA Drama Majors or BA (Honors) Drama students.
DRAMA 102 Play Analysis =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding of Drama through critical analysis of plays and its application to creative solutions in their production. Note: Not to be taken by BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, or BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors.
DRAMA 103 Critical Analysis of Playtexts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of playtexts in reference to the specific challenges faced by actors, directors, designers, and dramaturgs. Note: Restricted to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama majors, or admission by consent of Department based on successful completion of Drama 30 or equivalent. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 102.
DRAMA 149 Dramatic Process I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Speech and movement improvisation with an emphasis on imaginative development; introduction to the process of acting and to dramatic form. Note: Designed for students with little or no previous background in Drama. Not to be taken by BA Drama majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, or BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors.
DRAMA 150 Introduction to Dramatic Process Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Dramatic improvisation as an introduction to the process of acting and to dramatic form. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Restricted to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors, and BFA (Technical Theatre; Stage Management) students, or admission by consent of Department based on successful completion of Drama 30 or equivalent. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 149.
DRAMA 203 Performance Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of theatrical performance through a range of live and recorded examples using theoretical and critical approaches. Prerequisites: one of Drama 101, 102, or 103, or consent of department. Note: Priority will be given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors and Minors.
DRAMA 208 Theatre History I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The development of world theatre from antiquity to the end of the 18th century. Prerequisite: DRAMA 101 or 102 or 103 or consent of Department. Note: Required for BA Drama Majors and BA (Honors) Drama students. Priority will be given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, BFA Drama students, BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors and Minors.
DRAMA 240 Oral Communication and Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Voice and speech development and oral interpretation. Prerequisite: one of DRAMA 102 or 103; and one of 149 or 150; or consent of Department. Note: Restricted to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 247.
DRAMA 247 Introduction to Oral Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration of basic techniques of oral communication and oral interpretation drawing from various forms of literature. Note: Not to be taken by BA Drama majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, or BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors.
DRAMA 257 Scene Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Study of acting, including the analysis and enactment of scripted scenes, and characterization. Prerequisites: one of DRAMA 102 or 103 and one of 149 or 150; or consent of Department. Note: Priority will be given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors and Minors. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 353.
DRAMA 259 Performer-Created Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Practice in and theory of the collaborative development of dramatic performance using improvisation and other techniques. Prerequisites: DRAMA 102 or 103, and 149 or 150 or consent of Department. Note: Priority given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 249 or 359.
DRAMA 270 Basic Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Study and practice of design for the theatre. Prerequisite: A Stagecraft course and consent of the department. Not to be taken by students with credit in T Des 270.
DRAMA 279 Introduction to Stagecraft and Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Production techniques, construction, mechanics, lighting and design. Note: Priority given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors and Minors. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 379.
DRAMA 293 Introduction to Lighting and Electrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre: Technical Production) students.
DRAMA 294 Introduction to Theatre Sound Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre: Technical Production) students.
DRAMA 295 Introduction to Scenic and Stage Carpentry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre: Technical Production) students.
DRAMA 296 Introduction to Theatre Stage Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0).
DRAMA 298 Stage Management in Professional Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to BFA Technical Theatre (Stage Management) students.
DRAMA 302 Modern Canadian Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development in Canadian theatre and drama since 1967. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 403.
DRAMA 306 Historical Approaches to Western Dramatic and Theatrical Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical theories from Aristotle to Artaud. Pre- or corequisite: DRAMA 308 or consent of Department. Note: Required for BA (Honors) Drama students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 405 and 508.
DRAMA 307 Studies in Drama I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 308 Theatre History II: Modern Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The evolution of Modernism in the dramatic text, performance, and staging practices from the early 19th century to Epic Theatre. Note: Required for BA Drama Majors and BA (Honors) Drama students.
DRAMA 327 Community-Based Theatre =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). A study of the theory, practice and development of popular, community and collective theatre. Recommended for students who intend to enroll in DRAMA 427.
DRAMA 331 Movement and Physical Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). An introduction to the use of improvisational movement in the creation of physical theatre. Prerequisite: DRAMA 259 or consent of the Department. Note: Priority will be given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, and BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors.
DRAMA 334 Beginning Movement Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-8L-0). Techniques in ballet and period style for the actor. Exploration of creative forms of movement and the physical self in characterization. Note: Restricted to BFA Acting. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 336 or 338.
DRAMA 335 Movement in Rehearsal and Performance Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-1). Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. This is a credit- fail course.
DRAMA 344 Voice and Speech Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-8L-0). Introduction to voice and speech improvement; oral interpretation; exploration of the voice for characterization; singing. Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 346 or 348.
DRAMA 345 Speech in Rehearsal and Performance Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-1). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. This is a credit-fail course.
DRAMA 355 Acting in Rehearsal and Performance Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-3). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students.
DRAMA 356 Beginning Acting Technique I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-10L-0). Development of the self as the fundamental instrument of the actor. Introduction to script analysis and scene study. Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students.
DRAMA 357 Scene Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Acting exercises based on the study of plays emphasizing complexity of language and characterization. Prerequisites: DRAMA 102 or 103, and 240 and 257, and a Theatre History course from the Department of Drama course listings; and/or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 453.
DRAMA 358 Beginning Acting Technique II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-10L-0). Script analysis, characterization, and the laboratory exploration of scenes and/or plays drawn from Realism. Prerequisite: DRAMA 356. Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students.
DRAMA 361 Playwriting Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Study of and practice in the creation of a play for the theatre. Prerequisite: DRAMA 101 or one of DRAMA 102, 103, 149, or 150 or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 360 or 407 in playwriting.
DRAMA 383 Introduction to Directing =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Fundamentals of directing explored through practical exercises. Prerequisites: One of DRAMA 257, 370, 378 and/or consent of Department. Note: Priority given to BA Drama Majors, BA (Honors) Drama students, BEd (Secondary) Drama Majors, and BFA (Theatre Design; Technical Theatre; Stage Management) students.
DRAMA 390 Production Crew I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-8L-0). Production experience in the preparation for and the running of a production for performance. Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre) students.
DRAMA 391 Production Lab I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-8L-0). Technical theatre practice. Preparation and running of the production aspects of Departmental plays. Prerequisite: DRAMA 279 or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 191.
DRAMA 392 Production Lab II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-0-6). Production experience in stage managing and/or technical theatre with qualified technical experts. Prerequisites: DRAMA 191, 391, and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 393 Production Lab II B Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 0-0-2). Production organization; experience in running of a play in performance. Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. A required non-credit course.
DRAMA 394 Production Techniques - Sound Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Theory and practical application of audio equipment and sound design for the theatre. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Technical Theatre) students.
DRAMA 395 Production Crew II - Stage Management Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 0-15L-0). Production experience in the preparation for and/ or the running of a production for performance. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 490. Prerequisite: DRAMA 390. Note: Restricted to BFA Technical Theatre: Stage Management students.
DRAMA 399 Explorations in Acting I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). Exploration of dramatic text using exercises devoted to the coordination of the actor’s voice, speech and movement. Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. Course grading criterion is in terms of ‘credit/non-credit’ only.
DRAMA 401 Research and Critical Writing Skills Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: DRAMA 306. Note: Required for BA (Honors) students.
DRAMA 402 Tutorial Fourth-Year Honors Essay Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, unassigned). Prerequisite: DRAMA 401. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 505.
DRAMA 406 Contemporary Approaches to Dramatic and Theatrical Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Modernist to contemporary theories applied to dramatic texts in performance. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Required for BA (Honors) Drama students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 503 and 509.
DRAMA 407 Studies in Drama II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 409 Contemporary Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration of issues and trends of theatre movements which form the mosaic of contemporary theatre. Prerequisite: A Theatre History course from the Department of Drama course listings, or consent of Department.
DRAMA 427 Topics in Community Based and Applied Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-5L-0). Theory and practice of theatre developed for and with specific communities. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. Drama 327 is recommended.
DRAMA 434 Theatre Movement Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-8L-0). Studies of, and projects in styles of movement and dance, both period and contemporary. Prerequisite: DRAMA 334. Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 436 or 438.
DRAMA 435 Movement in Rehearsal and Performance Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-2). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. This is a credit-fail course.
DRAMA 444 Advanced Voice and Speech Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6.5L-0). Extension of the voice; sight reading, oral interpretation of period dramatic forms; singing. Prerequisite: DRAMA 344. Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 446 or 448.
DRAMA 445 Speech in Rehearsal and Performance Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-0-2). Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. This is a credit-fail course.
DRAMA 452 Solo Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Advanced theatrical tools to create and present original solo performance. Prerequisite: DRAMA 257 and 259, and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 453 Physical Comedy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). The exploration and practice of physical comedy styles through clown, bouffon, and mask. Prerequisite: DRAMA 259 and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 454 Performance Creation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Exploration, practice, and experimentation in performer-created theatre. Prerequisite: DRAMA 259 and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 455 Acting in Rehearsal and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students.
DRAMA 456 Advanced Acting Technique I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-10L-0). Studies in characterization leading to laboratory performance. Prerequisite: DRAMA 358. Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students.
DRAMA 457 Production/Performance Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-8L-0). Research, rehearsal, design, staging and presentation of a play by an acting ensemble. Prerequisites: DRAMA 357 and 391, a Theatre History course from the Department of Drama course listings, and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 458 Advanced Acting Technique II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-10L-0). Study of, and practice in, the main period styles of acting. Prerequisite: DRAMA 456. Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students.
DRAMA 483 Elements of Directing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Developing the director’s creative use of the elements of directing through practical exercises in scripted scenes. Prerequisites: DRAMA 102 or 103, 383 and 391, and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 490 Production Crew II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-8L-0). Production experience in the preparation for and/ or the running of a production for performance. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 395. Prerequisite: DRAMA 390. Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre) students.
DRAMA 492 Running Crew Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Production organization: experience in preparing and running of a play in performance. Prerequisites: DRAMA 191, or 391 and/ or consent of Department.
DRAMA 494 Specialized Skills in Stage Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Skill sets for the practice of Stage Management. Note: Restricted to BFA Technical Theatre (Stage Management) students. Repeatable (to be taken two years in succession).
DRAMA 495 Management-Practices for Technical Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Administrative practice directed toward production shop facilities and personnel. Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre) students.
DRAMA 497 Workshops in Technical Theatre Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-10L-0). Technical production techniques and practice (i.e., health and safety, rigging, flying, rolling stock and tracked stages, hydraulics, pneumatics, plastics and metal fabrication, etc.). Prerequisite: DRAMA 397. Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre: Technical Production) students. Repeatable (to be taken two years in succession).
DRAMA 499 Explorations in Acting II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). Exploration of dramatic text related to period style with emphasis on characterization, and special problems. Prerequisite: DRAMA 399. Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. Course grading criterion is in terms of ‘credit/no credit’ only.
DRAMA 507 Senior Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 534 Advanced Movement Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Instruction and projects for individual growth in movement expression. Prerequisite: DRAMA 438. Note: Restricted to BFA (Drama) students.
DRAMA 535 Movement in Rehearsal and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-3). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. This is a credit-fail course.
DRAMA 544 Dialects and Accents/Language Styles Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-7L-0). Survey of dialects and accents; intensive practice in representative examples from the British Isles, Europe and North America; tutorial instruction to suit the actor’s vocal needs; singing. Prerequisite: DRAMA 448. Note: Restricted to BFA (Drama) students.
DRAMA 545 Speech in Rehearsal and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-3). Note: Restricted to BFA Acting students. This is a credit-fail course.
DRAMA 554 Rehearsal and Performance Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-25L-0). Rehearsal and performance of roles in public production. Workshops in acting for film and radio. Prerequisite: DRAMA 458. Note: Restricted to BFA (Acting) students.
DRAMA 577 Special Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Special projects in design and production. Formerly part of DRAMA 507.
DRAMA 590 Production Crew III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-15L-0). Production experience in preparing and/or running of a production for performance. Prerequisite: DRAMA 490. Note: Restricted to BFA (Technical Theatre) students. Repeatable.
DRAMA 599 Explorations in Acting III Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-2L-0). Prerequisite: DRAMA 499. Restricted to BFA (Acting) students. Course grading criterion is in terms of ‘credit/no credit’ only.
Graduate Courses
DRAMA 595 Professional Orientation for Theatre Artists Œ0 (fi 2) (either term, 2-0-0). Preparing the artist for developing a career in professional theatre. Required for graduation for BFA in Acting, Stage Management, Technical Theatre and Design students.
DRAMA 596 Advanced Stage Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Stage management practice as it applies to different types of production. Prerequisite: DRAMA 396. Note: Restricted to BFA Technical Theatre (Stage Management) students. Repeatable (to be taken two years in succession).
DRAMA 601 Methods and Tools of Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0).
DRAMA 605 Special Projects in Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 606 Special Projects in Theatre Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3L-0). Normally restricted to MFA Theatre Practice students. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 607 Dramaturgy I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0).
DRAMA 608 Historical Approaches to Dramatic and Theatrical Critical Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An in-depth analysis of selected theories of aesthetics, drama and theatre, from Aristotle to Modernism.
DRAMA 609 Contemporary Approaches to Dramatic and Theatrical Critical Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An in-depth analysis of selected contemporary theories of aesthetics, drama and theatre, from Structuralism to the present.
DRAMA 617 Dramaturgy II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-9L-0). Practical studies in dramaturgy. Prerequisites: DRAMA 607 and/or consent of Department.
DRAMA 621 Research Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Theory and Criticism.
DRAMA 622 Research Seminar II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Theory and Criticism.
DRAMA 623 Research Seminar III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Theatre History and Theatrical Theory.
DRAMA 624 Research Seminar IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics in Theatre History and Theatrical Theory.
DRAMA 640 Voice Pedagogy I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-9L-0). Study of theory and pedagogical approaches to teaching voice, speech and text for the theatre.
DRAMA 641 Voice Pedagogy II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-9L-0). Advanced study of theory and pedagogical approaches to teaching and coaching voice, speech and text for the theatre, and for presentation skills. Prerequisite: DRAMA 640.
DRAMA 642 Vocal Coaching for the Theatre I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-12L-0). Observation and analysis of approaches to coaching voice, speech and text for the theatre.
DRAMA 643 Vocal Coaching for the Theatre II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-12L-0). Advanced observation, analysis and supervised teaching and coaching of voice, speech and text for the theatre and for presentation skills. Prerequisite: DRAMA 642.
DRAMA 644 Vocal Coaching for the Theatre III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-12L-0). Supervised and independent teaching and coaching of voice, speech and text for the theatre and for presentation skills. Prerequisite: DRAMA 643.
DRAMA 677 Senior Applied Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Practice-based special projects in theatre. Restricted to graduate students doing applied projects. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 683 Styles of Directing I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-6). Note: Restricted to MFA (Drama) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 680.
DRAMA 684 Styles of Directing II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-6). Note: Restricted to MFA (Drama) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 680.
DRAMA 685 Advanced Projects in Directing I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-6). Note: Restricted to MFA (Drama) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 681.
DRAMA 686 Advanced Projects in Directing II: New Play Dramaturgy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-6). Note: Restricted to MFA (Drama) and MA (Drama) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 681.
DRAMA 690 Topics in Applied Theatre Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
DRAMA 695 Final Research Project (Course Based Masters) Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, unassigned). Public presentation of final research project. This is a pass/fail course.
DRAMA 777 Theatre Practice Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Practice-based research projects in any area of theatre. Prerequisite: consent of Department. This is a Pass/Fail Course.
#
Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
EAS
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) Priority for enrolment in some courses may be given to students currently enrolled in programs for which those courses are required.
(2) Field courses require the ability to work outside during the day, navigating off-trail terrain, away from any facilities including washrooms. Inclement weather and other outdoor hazards may be experienced during these field courses.
(3) Students are responsible for their own accommodation and meal expenses on all Earth and Atmospheric Sciences field trips and field courses.
(4) A list of paleontology courses and course descriptions may be found under Paleontology.
(5) Please note that Faculty of Arts courses offered by the EAS Department are now listed under the HGP course designator in the Arts section of the calendar. The following table lists old and new course numbers effective 2012-2013:
Undergraduate Courses Faculty of Science Courses
EAS 100 Planet Earth =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the origin and evolution of the Earth and the solar system. Introduction to plate tectonics and the rock cycle. Simple energy balances and interactions between radiation and the atmosphere, land, oceans, ice masses, and the global hydrological cycle. Evolution of life, biogeography, and global climate in the context of geologic time. The carbon cycle. Human interaction with the Earth. Mineral and energy resources. Not available to students with credit in EAS 101, 102 or 201 or SCI 100 (Note: Students with credit in EAS 201 may take EAS 200.). [Faculty of Science]
EAS 105 The Dynamic Earth Through Time =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The plate tectonic framework of a dynamic Earth as it relates to the origin of major groups of minerals and rocks. Earthquakes, structural geology, and the origin of mountain belts. Surface processes and their sedimentary products. History of life and extinctions. Not available to students with credit in EAS 101, 210 or SCI 100. Prerequisite: EAS 100 or GEOPH 110 or GEOPH 210.
EAS 110 Earth Science Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 7 days). This excursion through the mountains and prairies of Alberta introduces students to the diverse geology and geomorphology of the region. The structure of rocks will be observed, fossils identified, and glacial deposits studied, in order to understand the geological processes that have occurred here over geologic time. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Intended for students in their first or second year. Not available to students with previous credit in an EAS field school (EAS 234, 354, or 333). Prerequisite: One of EAS 100, 101, 201, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 200 Introductory Studies in Earth Science Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-0-3). Laboratory study of topics in introductory Earth Science. EAS 200 and EAS 201 are considered to be equivalent to EAS 100 for prerequisite purposes. Not available to students with credit in EAS 100, 101, EAS 210 or SCI 100. Prerequisite: EAS 201.
EAS 201 Earth Science I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A non-laboratory introduction to the origin and evolution of the Earth and the solar system. Introduction to plate tectonics and the rock cycle. Simple energy balances and interactions between radiation and the atmosphere, land, oceans, ice masses, and the global hydrological cycle. Evolution of life, biogeography, and global climate in the context of geologic time. The carbon cycle. Human interactions with the Earth. Mineral and energy resources. Not available to students with credit in EAS 100, 101, 102, 210 or SCI 100. (Note: EAS 201 and EAS 200 are considered to be equivalent to EAS 100 for prerequisite purposes). [Faculty of Science]
EAS 202 Violent Weather Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of severe and unusual weather, with emphasis on tornadoes, hurricanes, hail and lightning. The scientific basis for the occurrence of these phenomena is presented along with practical precautions which may be taken to minimize their danger. Computer simulation and videos are used to illustrate how the weather systems work. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 204 Environment Alberta Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The physical environment of Alberta. Regional variation in the patterns of climate, landforms, water, soils, vegetation and wildlife; the geographic synthesis of these patterns to give a broad understanding and appreciation of the province and its environmental problems. Prerequisite: One of EAS 100, 101, 102, 201, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 205 Environment Earth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). General introduction to interactions between people and their natural environment, with an emphasis on geological processes. Topics include: soil resources and degradation; earthquakes and volcanoes; streams and flooding; landslides, mass movement and subsidence, shoreline development and coastal processes; surface water and groundwater resources; air and water pollution; waste management and disposal; and global change. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 206 Geology of the Solar System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Origin of the elements and the solar system, origin and evolution of the planets. Geologic and atmospheric properties of the planets, the nature of meteorites and comets. Results of recent space exploration. Prerequisite: Any 100-level or higher Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 207 Mass Extinctions and Dinosaurs Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A discussion and description of the progression of life through time, with emphasis on important radiations and mass extinctions of life, and theories on why they occur. Evolution, radiation, morphology and life habits of dinosaurs are considered in detail. The evidence for asteroid impacts in the geologic record, their frequency and effect on the history of organisms through time. Origin and evolution of humans, and their impact on the biosphere. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 208 Introduction to Global Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Natural and anthropogenic causes of global scale environmental change; the role of the atmosphere, oceans, biosphere and cryosphere in the processes of environmental change; relationships between levels of technology and development and the character of environmental change associated with human activity. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 209 Geology of Western Canada and the National and Provincial Parks Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the geology and landscapes of Western Canada. The spectacularly exposed rocks of the prairie and mountain parks of Alberta and British Columbia will be fitted into a regional geological framework and examples from parks such as Yoho, Banff, Jasper, Dinosaur, and Kananaskis will be highlighted. Geological processes of mountain building and past and present landscape evolution will be emphasized. Prerequisite: One of EAS 100, 101, 103, 105, 201, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 210 Engineering Earth Science Œ4.5 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Rock-forming minerals, origins of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks; economic minerals and ore deposits; rock weathering and soil formation, mass-wasting, groundwater, deformation of the earth’s crust. Laboratories on identification of minerals and rocks and the interpretation of topographic and geologic maps and aerial photography. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 101, 105, or SCI 100. Intended for students in Engineering programs. Restricted to students in Engineering programs. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 212 The Oceans Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the physics and chemistry of the oceans. Topics covered include ocean currents, the ocean floor, origins and buffering of the chemistry of the oceans. The role of the oceans in determining past and present climates is introduced. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 215 Introduction to Arctic Environments and Climate =OPEN Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). Students will learn about the circumpolar North, starting with an overview of regional geography, and then focusing on the cryosphere (ice), atmosphere and ocean of the region. Students will learn why the Arctic is cold and ice covered, and how that impacts its climate and ecosystems. Topics will also include present-day climate change, the processes driving it, and evidence for it in the Arctic, as well as its implications in the rapidly evolving North. This course will be delivered entirely on-line. Prerequisites: Biology 30 or equivalent, or any 100-level course in the Faculty of Science.
EAS 221 Introduction to Geographical Information Systems and Remote Sensing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Background to the principles of Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing. Lectures emphasize the theoretical and methodological underpinnings, labs impart the technical aspects through hands-on experience with appropriate software. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Science course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 222 Stratigraphy and Sedimentation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Origin of sedimentary materials; sedimentary processes; sedimentary structures, textures, and flow regimes; properties and classification of clastic and non-clastic rocks; sedimentary environments and facies in non-marine, coastal and marine settings; principles of stratigraphy, stratigraphic nomenclature and the stratigraphic column. Prerequisite: One of EAS 101, 103, 105 or 210. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 224 Mineralogy I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Principles of crystallography, physical and chemical properties of minerals, determinative mineralogy. Prerequisite: EAS 101, 105, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 225 Earth Surface Processes and Landforms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Geomorphological processes and landform analysis with special reference to the landscape of Alberta. Fieldwork required. Prerequisite: One of EAS 100, 101, 102, 201, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 230 Introduction to Invertebrate Paleontology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Systematics of important groups of invertebrate fossils. Introduction to biostratigraphy, paleoecology, and the study of mass extinctions and faunal radiations. Mechanisms and patterns of evolution. Groups covered include: Porifera, Cnidaria, Brachiopoda, Mollusca, Trilobita, Echinodermata, and some microfossil groups. Prerequisite: EAS 103, 105 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 232 Mineralogy II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Optical techniques in determinative mineralogy with particular emphasis on transmitted-light microscopy and its application to common rock-forming minerals. Mineral associations, textures and elementary ideas on the origin of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. Prerequisite: EAS 224. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 233 Geologic Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Orientation, measurement description, and analysis of planar and linear structures in rocks, including folds, faults, and fabrics. Introduction to mapping and the collection of structural information. Construction of geologic maps and cross-sections. Introduction to stereographic and equal-area projections. Basic concepts of strain and stress in rock deformation. Prerequisite: EAS 105, 210 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 234 Geology Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 12 Days). Geological field studies with emphasis on properties of sedimentary rocks, paleontology, stratigraphy, Quaternary geology, structural mapping, and Cordilleran tectonics. Field exercises teach the fundamentals of recording field data, reconstructing depositional environments, and tectonic interpretation. This field school takes place immediately following the Winter examination period. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Enrolment is restricted to honours and specialization students in Geology, Environmental Earth Sciences and Paleontology. Prerequisites: EAS 233, and one of EAS 222, 235 or 236. Cannot be taken if credit has already been received for EAS 237. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 237 Geological Field Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Geological field exercises designed to teach the fundamentals of recording field data; identifying rocks, fossils, and minerals in the field; geological mapping; reconstructing depositional environments; Quaternary geology; and the description and interpretation of tectonic structures. This field school will run following the Winter examination period or preceding the Fall term. Prerequisites: EAS 233, and one of EAS 222, 235 or 236. Cannot be taken if credit has already been received for EAS 234. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 250 Biogeography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The factors controlling global distribution of plants and animals will be covered from ecological and historical perspectives. Techniques for the analysis of biogeographic patterns, including paleoecology, remote sensing, and phylogenetics. Ecosystem responses to global change, including species migration, disturbance ecology, and invasions. May require field trips. If so, will require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: EAS 100, BIOL 108 or SCI 100.
EAS 270 The Atmosphere Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to weather. Atmospheric composition, vertical structure and energetics. Humidity and clouds, stratification and instability. Atmospheric motion on the global and synoptic scales. Air masses, fronts and storms. Introduction to weather maps, weather analysis and numerical weather prediction models. Weather map discussions. Prerequisite: Any 100-level Mathematics or Physics course, or SCI 100.
EAS 320 Geochemistry I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A survey of chemical processes occurring in geological settings with emphasis on the principles governing the migration and distribution of the elements and isotopes in the earth. Thermodynamics applied to aqueous systems. Introduction to organic geochemistry and global geochemical cycles. Prerequisite: CHEM 101 and CHEM 102 and EAS 224. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of CHEM 101, 102. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 323 Introduction to Hydrogeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The hydrologic cycle, water budgets and basic hydrologic processes; physical properties of porous media and groundwater flow principles; steady-state groundwater flow; transient groundwater flow, well hydraulics and groundwater resource evaluation; regional groundwater flow; and, basic hydrochemistry and transport processes. Prerequisites: One of EAS 100, 101, 102, 201 or 210 and MATH 113 or 114, PHYS 124 or 144, and one of PHYS 126, 130, or 146. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of EAS 100, MATH 114, PHYS 144 and 146. Not available to students with credit in EAS 223. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 324 Quaternary Geoscience and Terrain Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Quaternary geoscience and applied geomorphology, including dating methods, stratigraphy and paleoclimates. Fundamentals of interpretation and mapping of surficial geology and geomorphology from aerial photographs and satellite images with a focus on western Canada. Some field work may be required. Prerequisites: EAS 221 and 225. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 327 Environmental Instrumentation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Laboratory work and lectures to develop skills in environmental measurement through comprehension of first principles. Instrumentation (basic electronics; matching signal sources and receivers; noise; frequency response). Sensor-environment coupling (heat and mass transfer). Sampling theory. Principles will be applied to selected environmental monitoring instruments. Field trip. Prerequisites: EAS 100 or 102 and MATH 113 or 114. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of these prerequisites.
EAS 331 Igneous Petrology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A survey of igneous rocks from the ocean basins and the continents; their field settings, classification, petrography, mineralogy and chemistry; magmatic processes and petrogenesis; problem solving and laboratory work on major rock suites. Prerequisites: CHEM 102 or SCI 100 and EAS 232 and prerequisite or corequisite EAS 320. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 332 Metamorphic Petrology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the classification and genesis of metamorphic rocks in light of field, petrographic and geochemical data. Prerequisites: EAS 320 and 331 or consent of the instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 333 Advanced Geology Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 12 Days). The study and mapping of deformed sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks and of macroscopic and mesoscopic structures in the field. 12 days of field exercises following Winter term examination period. Co-prerequisites: EAS 233, 234 or 237, 331 and 332. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 336 Sedimentary Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Petrography, petrology, and petrogenesis of clastic, biochemical, and chemical sedimentary rocks. Diagenesis of sediments and sedimentary rocks, selected sedimentary depositional environments, and facies analysis, as tools for the interpretation of the sedimentary rock record. Fundamentals, terminology, and conceptual frameworks of sequence stratigraphy. Laboratory exercises based on the analysis of hand samples, thin sections, and core. Prerequisite: EAS 222. Not available to students with credit in EAS 235 or 236. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 351 Environmental Applications of Geographical Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course emphasizes the applications of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to the environmental sciences. Examples from resource management and the earth and biological sciences are discussed. Labs impart technical experience with ARCINFO. Prerequisites: EAS 221 and one of MATH 113, 114, STAT 141, 151, SCI 151, or permission of the instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 354 Environmental Earth Science Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 12 Days). Introduction to fieldwork in geomorphology, biogeography and microclimatology. Elementary field mapping, the use of electronic field instrumentation for hydrological, water quality and micro-climatological monitoring, mapping and analysis of vegetation patterns, and techniques for the field description and laboratory analysis of soils and sediments. Introductory lectures and ten days of fieldwork. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: EAS 225, 250 and either 270 or 327, or consent of Instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 364 Petroleum Geology and Subsurface Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Source rocks and origin of petroleum; principles of fluid migration; reservoir rocks and traps. Exploration and development of hydrocarbon plays using subsurface techniques. Introduction to reservoir evaluation and hydrocarbon production. Prerequisite: EAS 336 or consent of instructor. Not available to students with credit in EAS 424 or 430.
EAS 368 Ore Deposits Geology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Mineralogy and petrography of ore and gangue minerals under the reflected and transmitted light microscope and in hand specimen. Interpretation of ore textures and paragenetic sequences. Geological characteristics and distribution of ore deposits, including deposits of base and precious metals, diamonds, and industrial minerals. Prerequisite: EAS 331. Not available to students with credit in EAS 433. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 370 Applied Atmospheric Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the physics of the atmosphere with applications: temperature, pressure, humidity, evaporation, condensation, dew, freezing, ice, frost, convection, clouds, rain, hail, rainbows, solar and terrestrial radiation. Development of thermodynamic concepts and tools used by atmospheric scientists in the analysis and forecasting of weather and climate: potential temperatures, psychrometry, thermodynamic diagrams, radiation charts. Prerequisites: EAS 270 and MATH 214. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 371 Dynamics of the Atmosphere and Ocean I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to fluid dynamics on the rotating earth with reference to the atmosphere and ocean; equations of motion and their simplification; vorticity; the atmospheric boundary layer; waves in the atmosphere and ocean. Prerequisites: EAS 270 and MATH 214. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 372 Weather Analysis and Forecasting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to synoptic analysis. Meteorological codes. Analysis of surface charts. Air-masses and fronts. Upper air constant pressure charts. Structure and evolution of weather systems. Analysis of current and predicted weather data. Synoptic weather forecasting. Prerequisite: EAS 371. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 373 The Climate System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the physical processes influencing global climate. Radiation and energy in the climate system, the hydrological cycle, general circulation of the atmosphere and ocean, climate feedback mechanisms, climate history and climate change, introduction to climate models. Prerequisite: EAS 270. Not available to students with credit in EAS 271. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 421 Structural Geology and Tectonics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Geometric, kinematic, and dynamic analysis of structures produced by deformation. Stress and the origin of faults, joints, veins, folds, and tectonites. Brittle and ductile strain in rocks. Extensional, strike-slip, and compressional structural associations. Regional structure, orogens, and crustal tectonics. Lab exercises include structural interpretation for subsurface hydrocarbon and mineral exploration, stereographic techniques for structural analysis, and the study of rock fabrics. Prerequisites: EAS 233 and any 300-level EAS course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 321. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 425 Contaminant Hydrogeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the principles of groundwater chemistry, the chemical evolution of natural groundwater flow systems, sources of contamination, and mass transport processes. Hydrogeologic aspects of waste disposal and groundwater remediation. Prerequisite: EAS 323. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 426 Undergraduate Thesis Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). Required for Honors students in their final year. Restricted to honors and specialization students in EAS. Prerequisite: Any 300-level EAS course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 427 Directed Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). EAS 427 and 428 provide a means whereby Specialization and Honors students in their fourth year of the EAS program may undertake a research project supervised by a faculty member. Prerequisite: Any 300-level EAS course. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 428 Directed Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EAS 427. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 429 Practical Study in Earth and Atmospheric Science Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 10 - 15 days). Intensive field or practical study in EAS, typically as part of a team working off-campus. Details and areas of study may vary from year to year; consult the department about current offerings, fees and timing. Prerequisite: Any 300-level EAS course and permission of the department. [Faculty of Science] Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EAS 432 Precambrian Geology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Precambrian geological evolution of Earth focusing on development of the continental lithosphere. Geochemical evolution of the crust and mantle as well as the atmosphere and hydrosphere. Special reference to the evolution, stratigraphy, petrology and geochronology of the Canadian Shield. Prerequisite: EAS 320 and 331. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 451 Digital Remote Sensing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course introduces the interactions of electromagnetic radiation with terrestrial materials (rocks, soils, water, snow). These notions are fundamental for the interpretation of optical, thermal, and radar remote sensing imagery. Labs focus on image processing with emphasis on radiometric and geometric enhancements and image classification. The course covers existing and upcoming sensors and applications of the data to earth sciences including geologic and land use mapping and resource exploration. Prerequisite: EAS 221. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 457 Global Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major processes of change in the contemporary environment, their history and their interrelationships (climate and sea level change, changes in atmospheric composition, deforestation, desertification, water resource depletion, soil erosion, atmospheric and aquatic pollution); global biogeochemical cycles and their role in environmental change. Prerequisite: One of EAS 208, 225 or 250. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 458 Cold Regions Geoscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Environments and environmental change associated with high latitude and high elevation regions. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta. ca/eas458 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Arctic environments; (2) Alpine environments; (3) Antarctica. Prerequisite: EAS 225 or 250 or consent of the instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 460 Geobiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The relationship between biology and geology. Ichnology, geomicrobiology, and microfossil content. The evolution of animal-rock relationships through time. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas460 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Ichnology; (2) Geomicrobiology; (3) Micropaleontology. Prerequisite: EAS 336. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 462 Stratigraphy and Sedimentary Basins Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The science of rock strata in a sequence stratigraphic framework; sequence stratigraphic models; classification and evolution of sedimentary basins; applications of sequence stratigraphy to depositional systems and tectonic settings. Prerequisite EAS 336. Not available to students with credit in EAS 330. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 464 Applied Hydrocarbon Geoscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advanced topics in the characterization of petroleum resources and the regional occurrence of hydrocarbons. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas464 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Regional and Petroleum Hydrogeology; (2) Petroleum Systems; (3) Geology of unconventional reservoirs; (4) Sedimentary Diagenesis and Reservoir Quality. Prerequisite: EAS 323 and 364, or consent of instructor.
EAS 465 Sedimentology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The science of sedimentary rocks, focusing on the interpretation of sedimentary strata. Topics vary: visit the Earth and Atmospheric Sciences course listing website for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Carbonate Sedimentology and Diagenesis; (2) Clastic Sedimentology. Prerequisite: EAS 336.
EAS 466 Petrogenesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Origin and formation of igneous and metamorphic rocks in the light of field, mineralogical, chemical and experimental evidence. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas466 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Cratons, Kimberlites and Diamonds; (2) Petrology of Subduction Processes. Prerequisites: EAS 331 and EAS 332, which may be taken concurrently with permission of the instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 467 Planetary Geology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The geologically evolving Earth and its context in an evolving solar system. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas467 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Planetary Systems; (2) Earth System Evolution (Not available to students with credit in EAS 435). Prerequisites: EAS 331 and EAS 332. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 468 Geochemical Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Application of geochemistry to Earth materials and geological settings. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas468 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Geochemistry of Ore Deposits; (2) Environmental Geochemistry (Not available to students with credit in EAS 420). Prerequisite: EAS 320 or consent of instructor. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 470 Clouds and Storms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Cloud properties; convection; precipitation; weather radar; severe convective storms; precipitation forecasting. Prerequisites: EAS 370 and 371.
EAS 471 Atmospheric Modelling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Dynamics and physics of general circulation models. Numerical Weather Prediction models, ocean models, limited area models. Finite difference methods; spectral methods, and numerical stability. Prerequisites: EAS 371, 373 and MATH 215. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 475 Dynamics of the Atmosphere and Ocean II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s-0). Synoptic-scale processes; the general circulation; turbulence; oceanic mixing; wind-driven circulation; waves in the atmosphere and ocean; baroclinic instability; tides. Prerequisites: EAS 212 and 371 or consent of instructor. [Faculty of Science]
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) The following undergraduate course may be taken for credit by graduate students: PALEO 418, 419.
(2) Enrolment in graduate courses is subject to consent by the instructor. Some graduate courses are not offered every year.
Faculty of Science Courses
EAS 520 Reading and Seminar Course Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). [Faculty of Science]
EAS 521 Advanced Structural Geology and Tectonics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Geometric, kinematic, and dynamic analysis of structures produced by deformation. Stress and the origin of faults, joints, veins, folds, and tectonites. Brittle and ductile strain in rocks. Extensional, strike-slip, and compressional structural associations. Regional structure, orogens, and crustal tectonics. Lab exercises include structural interpretation for subsurface hydrocarbon and mineral exploration, stereographic techniques for structural analysis, and the study of rock fabrics. Classes concurrent with EAS 421. Not available to students with credit in EAS 321 or 421. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 523 Advanced Topics in Earth Observation Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advanced treatment of methods and applications in earth observation science. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas523 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Multi- and hyperspectral remote sensing; (2) Radar remote sensing; (3) Geoinformatics; (4) Monitoring land use and land cover change with GIS. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 539 Isotope Geology: Radioactive Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and systematics of radioactive decay, geochronology and isotopic tracing U-Pb, Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, Re-Os and other radioisotope systems. Applications of natural radioactive isotope variation to a variety of problems spanning low and high temperature geologic processes. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 540 Isotope Geology: Stable Isotope Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory of light-element isotope fractionation; isotope variations in the meteoric cycle, igneous, metamorphic, sedimentary rocks and ore deposits. Isotope techniques in paleothermometry and paleoclimate studies. Isotope biogeochemistry, oil and gas. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 541 Topics in Structural Geology and Tectonics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics in tectonics and structural geology, from microscopic to macroscopic scale, including present-day tectonic processes and the development of ancient orogens.
EAS 544 Hydrogeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The storage and movement of water through Earth media. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas544 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Topics include: (1) Quantitative Hydrogeology; (2) Regional Groundwater Flow. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 547 Methods and Instrumentation in Geology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course will cover analytical techniques such as probe. SEM, XRD, TIMS/gas source mass spectrometry, superpress, XRF, ICP-MS, TEM, NMR, SHRIMP and microthermometric techniques. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 553 Ice Dynamics and Glacier Hydrology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the mechanics and hydrology of ice masses with an emphasis on how they can be modelled and investigated in the field. The management of ice masses as sources of water and energy. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 556 Topics in Geomorphology and Sedimentology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected, contemporary theories of landscape and sediment formation in glacial, glaciofluvial, alluvial, and periglacial environments. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 560 Advanced Geobiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The relationship between biology and geology. Ichnology, geomicrobiology, and microfossil content. The evolution of animal- rock relationships through time. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas560 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 460 or 560 is repeated. Topics Include: (2) Ichnology; (2) Geomicrobiology; (3) Micropaleontology. Classes concurrent with EAS 460. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 562 Advanced Stratigraphy and Sedimentary Basins Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The science of rock strata in a sequence stratigraphic framework; sequence stratigraphic models; classification and evolution of sedimentary basins; applications of sequence stratigraphy to depositional systems and tectonic settings. Classes concurrent with EAS 462. Not available to students with credit in EAS 330 or 462. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 564 Advanced Applied Hydrocarbon Geoscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advanced topics in the characterization of petroleum resources and the regional occurrence of hydrocarbons. Topics vary: see www. eas.ualberta.ca/eas564 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 464 or 564 is repeated. Topics include: (1) Regional and Petroleum Hydrogeology; (2) Petroleum Systems; (3) Geology of unconventional reservoirs; (4) Sedimentary Diagenesis and Reservoir Quality. Classes concurrent with EAS 464.
EAS 565 Advanced Sedimentology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The science of sedimentary rocks, focusing on the interpretation of sedimentary strata. Topics vary: visit the Earth and Atmospheric Sciences course listing website for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 565 or EAS 465 is repeated. Topics include: (1) Carbonate Sedimentology and Diagenesis; (2) Clastic Sedimentology. Classes concurrent with EAS 465.
EAS 566 Advanced Petrogenesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Origin and formation of igneous and metamorphic rocks in the light of field, mineralogical, chemical and experimental evidence. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas566 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 466 or 566 is repeated. Topics include: (1) Cratons, Kimberlites and Diamonds; (2) Petrology of Subduction Processes. Classes concurrent with EAS 466. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 567 Advanced Planetary Geology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The geologically evolving Earth and its context in an evolving solar system. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas567 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 467 or EAS 567 is repeated. Topics include: (1) Planetary Systems; (2) Earth System Evolution (Not available to students with credit in EAS 435). Classes concurrent with EAS 467. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 568 Advanced Geochemical Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Application of geochemistry to Earth materials and geological settings. Topics vary: see www.eas.ualberta.ca/eas568 for details. May be taken more than once for credit provided no topic in EAS 468 or 568 is repeated. Topics include: (1) Geochemistry of Ore Deposits (Not available to students with credit in EAS 434); (2) Environmental Geochemistry. Classes concurrent with EAS 468. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 570 Advanced Climatology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of recent developments in climatology. Climate models and their use in examining past and future climates. Interactions between the atmosphere and terrestrial systems. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 583 Advanced Contaminant Hydrogeology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to principles of groundwater chemistry, the chemical evolution of natural groundwater flow systems, sources of contamination, and mass transport processes. Hydrogeologic aspects of waste disposal and groundwater remediation. Research project. Classes concurrent with EAS 425. Not available to students with credit in EAS 425. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 584 Advanced Clouds and Storms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Cloud properties; convection; precipitation; weather radar; severe convective storms; precipitation forecasting. Research project. Classes concurrent with EAS 470. Not available to students with credit in EAS 470.
EAS 585 Advanced Digital Remote Sensing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduces the interactions of electromagnetic radiation with terrestrial materials (rocks, soils, water, snow). These notions are fundamental for the interpretation of optical, thermal, and radar remote sensing imagery. Labs focus on image processing with emphasis on radiometric and geometric enhancements and image classification. Covers existing and upcoming sensors and applications of the data to earth sciences including geologic and land use mapping and resource exploration. Prerequisites: EAS 220 and 221. Classes concurrent with EAS 451. Not available to students with credit in EAS 451. [Faculty of Science]
EAS 587 Advanced Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s-0). Synoptic-scale processes; the general circulation; turbulence; oceanic mixing; wind-driven circulation; waves in the atmosphere and ocean; baroclinic instability; tides. Class concurrent with EAS 475. Not available to students with credit in EAS 475. [Faculty of Science]
#
East Asian Studies
EASIA
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
EASIA 101 Understanding East Asia =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Important aspects of pre-modern and modern East Asia from a broad interdisciplinary perspective.
EASIA 201 Overview of the Chinese Language System =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of basic features of the Chinese language. Designed to be taken concurrently with CHINA 201 or 202. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 208. Prerequisite: CHINA 102 or consent of Department.
EASIA 205 Language in Chinese Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may include language and gender, identity, dialects. Lectures in English. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 241. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and CHINA 102, or consent of Department.
EASIA 211 Overview of the Japanese Language =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). To be taken concurrently with JAPAN 201 or 202. Note: Not open to students with credit in or completing JAPAN 301. Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 241.
EASIA 215 Linguistics in Japanese Everyday Life Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and practical approaches to Japanese in real-life communicative situations. Prerequisite: Japan 202 or consent of Department.
EASIA 223 East Asian Religions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the major religious traditions of China, Japan, and Korea.
EASIA 224 Interculturalism and East Asian Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the major music traditions of China, Japan, and Korea through an exploration of Silk Road influences on Chinese music and Chinese musical influences on Japanese and Korean Music.
EASIA 232 Overview of Chinese Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major trends in Chinese literature, art, and other forms of cultural expression, from earliest times to the modern period. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 240. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 or consent of Department.
EASIA 234 The Chinese Literati Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literary and historical perspectives on the elite of pre-modern China. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 or consent of Department.
EASIA 236 Modernity and Contemporary Chinese Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development of modernity in modern and contemporary China, Taiwan, and/or Hong Kong and its influence on literature, cinema, visual culture and/or popular culture.
EASIA 239 Daoism and Chinese Civilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Ancient Chinese Daoist thought and its influence on the later history and culture of China.
EASIA 240 Overview of Japanese Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major trends in Japanese literature, art, and other forms of cultural expression, from earliest times to the modern period. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 240.
EASIA 242 The Samurai in Japanese Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The rise and fall of Japan’s warrior class and the construction of samurai mythology in Japanese popular culture and the Western imagination. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 242.
EASIA 260 Popular Culture and Contemporary Japanese Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Cultural texts and social changes in contemporary Japan. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 or consent of Department.
EASIA 270 Overview of Korean Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major trends in Korean literature, art, and other forms of cultural expression, from earliest times to the modern period. Note: Not open to students with credit in KOREA 240.
EASIA 305 Introduction to Chinese Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sound system, basic sentence structure, writing system, and language change and variation. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 308. Prerequisites: LING 101 and CHINA 202, or consent of Department.
EASIA 307 Chinese Psycholinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues and methods in Chinese language processing and spoken language comprehension. Prerequisite: LING 101 and CHINA 202, or consent of Department.
EASIA 315 Introduction to Japanese Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sound system, parts of speech, basic sentence structure, writing system, and language change and variation. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 325. Prerequisite: *3 from EASIA 215 or LING 101 and *3 from JAPAN 202 or EASIA 211, or consent of Department.
EASIA 316 Japanese Sociolinguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to social and interactional aspects of the Japanese language. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 326. Prerequisite: *3 from EASIA 215 or LING 101 and *3 from JAPAN 202 or EASIA 211, or consent of Department.
EASIA 323 Topics in East Asian Religions =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 223 or RELIG 240, or consent of Department.
EASIA 331 Pre-modern Chinese Literature in Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). From earliest times through the Qing Dynasty. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 321. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 333 Topics in Pre-modern Chinese Literature and Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings in translation, with selected original language materials for advanced language students. May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 336 Modern Chinese Literature in Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Chinese literature of the 20th and 21st centuries. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 322. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 341 Pre-Modern Japanese Literature in Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). From earliest times to the Tokugawa period. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 321. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 344 Tales of Two Japanese Cities =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores Japanese society through two of its most important cities: Kyoto and Tokyo. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 333. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 346 Modern Japanese Literature in Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by prominent writers from 1868 to the present. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 322. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 351 Culture and Identity in Taiwan Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between culture and identity in Taiwan through the study of literature and film in translation. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 351. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 371 Pre-Modern Korean Literature in Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). From earliest times through the Joseon (Choson) Dynasty. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 375 Introduction to Korean Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sound system, parts of speech, basic sentence structure, writing system, and language change and variation. Prerequisite: LING 101 and KOREA 202, or consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in KOREA 325.
EASIA 405 Chinese Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of the major linguistic features of the Chinese language. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 408. Prerequisite: CHINA 302 and EASIA 305, or consent of Department.
EASIA 415 Japanese Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of the major linguistic features of the Japanese language. Lectures in English. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 425. Prerequisite: *3 from EASIA 315, EASIA 316, or EASIA 456, or consent of Department.
EASIA 417 Practical Japanese Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical linguistic knowledge for effective learning of Japanese as a second language. Note: Not open to students with credit in JAPAN 427. Prerequisite: EASIA 315 and JAPAN 302, or consent of Department.
EASIA 423 Advanced Studies in Japanese Religions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: *3 from EASIA 223, EASIA 323, or RELIG 240, or consent of the Department.
EASIA 425 Topics in East/West Critical Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings in English of East Asian and Euro- American philosophers and critics. Prerequisite: EASIA 101, or *3 in literary theory, or consent of Department.
EASIA 427 Colonial and Post Colonial Culture in East Asia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Colonialism, soft power and transnational connections in East Asia through the lens of cultural production. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 431 Topics in Pre-Modern Chinese Literary History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The major works of a particular period or aspect of Chinese literature prior to 1900. Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department. CHINA 341 recommended.
EASIA 433 Classical Chinese Poetry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on the production of poetry as a cultural object. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 410. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department. CHINA 341 recommended.
EASIA 434 Readings in Classical Chinese Fiction =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analytical readings of premodern fiction written in classical and/or early vernacular Chinese. May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level and CHINA 341, or consent of the Department.
EASIA 436 Chinese Modernity: Literature and Film =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A cross-disciplinary study of literary and cinematic texts from modern China. Note: Not open to students with credit in CHINA 420. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 441 Topics in Japanese Literary History =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The major works of a particular period or aspect of Japanese literature. Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 448 Topics in Japanese Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Not open to web registration. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 451 Topics in Taiwan Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 455 Topics in Taiwan Literature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings in Taiwan literature with emphasis on tradition, theme, and technique. Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 456 Languages and Cultures of the Ryukyus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to linguistic and socio-cultural aspects of the Ryukyus, a past independent kingdom with strong ties to China, more recently subsumed by Japan. Prerequisite: *3 from EASIA 215 or LING 101 and *3 from JAPAN 202 or EASIA 211, or consent of Department.
EASIA 471 Topics in Korean Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 472 Topics in Korean Literary History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The major works of a particular period or aspect of Korean literature. Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101 and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 474 Readings in Classical Korean Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analytical readings of premodern Korean fiction. Note: May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: EASIA 101and *3 in EASIA at the senior level, or consent of Department.
EASIA 480 Honors Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Note: Open to fourth year Honors students only.
Graduate Courses
EASIA 515 Japanese Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of the major linguistic features of the Japanese language. Lectures in English. Prerequisite: advanced knowledge of Japanese language, a prior linguistics course, and consent of Department.
EASIA 525 Topics in East/West Critical Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings of East Asian and Euro-American philosophers and critics. Prerequisite: *3 in literary theory at the 400-level, or equivalent.
EASIA 556 Languages and Cultures of the Ryukyus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to linguistic and socio-cultural aspects of the Ryukyus, a past independent kingdom with strong ties to China, more recently subsumed by Japan. Prerequisite: JAPAN 301 or equivalent and consent of department.
EASIA 575 East Asian Language Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion and application of the theory and practice of teaching East Asian languages. Lectures in English. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
EASIA 598 Topics in East Asian Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An inquiry into the diversity of disciplines used in the study of East Asian literatures and cultures. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
EASIA 599 Directed Reading in East Asian Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). May be repeated for credit when course content differs. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
EASIA 652 Literary and Cultural Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Literary and cultural theory in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: This course is equivalent to MLCS 652.
#
Economics
ECON
Department of Economics Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) See also INT D 257, 302, 303, 346, and 369 for courses which are offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
(2) In the course listings below, ECON 204 will be accepted as the equivalent prerequisite of ECON 101 and/or 102.
Undergraduate Courses
ECON 101 Introduction to Microeconomics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). How markets and governments determine which products are produced and how income is distributed in the Canadian economy. Not open to students with credit in ECON 204.
ECON 102 Introduction to Macroeconomics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Employment, inflation, international payments, monetary policy, and fiscal policy, all in the Canadian economy. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in ECON 204.
ECON 110 An Introduction to Writing for Economics Students Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Formal instruction in the basic principles of writing, including a review of basic grammar. The focus is on hands-on practice in order to develop clear writing skills. Examples and exercises will be drawn from economics. Students will also make oral presentations. Prerequisite or corequisite: ECON 101. Restricted to BA Economics or BA Honors Economics students in the Faculty of Arts. ECON 110 can be substituted for *3 of the *6 Junior ENGL/WRS requirement for students with an Economics major in the BA or BA Honors in the Faculty of Arts.
ECON 203 Selected Topics in Economics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Content varies from year to year. Topics announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: ECON 101. Additional prerequisites may be required; consult the Department for further information.
ECON 204 Principles of Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to economic principles as applied to business organization and finance; price determination; enterprise costs and output optimization; commercial and central banking; national income analysis. For students enrolled in the Faculty of Engineering only. Not open to students with credit in ECON 101 and/or 102.
ECON 211 Chinese Economic Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the characteristics of and recent developments in the Chinese economy emphasizing the nature and consequences of China’s economic reforms and Canada’s economic relations with China. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or equivalent.
ECON 213 An Introduction to the Economics of Developing Countries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the major approaches to and problems of economic development in the less developed countries with particular emphasis on issues relating to savings and investment, income distribution, employment and population growth, and trade and aid. Prerequisite: ECON 101 and 102 or equivalent.
ECON 222 Technology, Institutions and Economic Growth =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Differences in technology and institutions are used to explain why some countries are richer than others; why economic growth rates differ across time and jurisdictions; and causes of convergence/divergence in cross-country growth rates. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or equivalent.
ECON 269 Economics of the Environment =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic growth and the deterioration of the environment; types, causes, theory, policy, and measurement, and current Canadian environmental topics. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or equivalent. Not open to students with credit in ECON 369, INT D 369, or INT D 225 offered as Economics and the Environment.
ECON 281 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory of consumer behavior; theory of production and cost; price and output determination under competition, monopoly and other market structures. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or equivalent.
ECON 282 Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Models of price, interest rate, output, and employment determination; the impact of fiscal, monetary, and supply shocks; open economy macroeconomics with fixed and flexible exchange rates, and prices as well as international capital mobility. Prerequisite: ECON 101 and 102 or consent of Department.
ECON 299 Quantitative Methods in Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Introduction to the use of statistical and mathematical methods in economics with computer applications. Prerequisites: ECON 101 and 102, STAT 141 or 151 and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100. Note: Designed for students taking Economics as a major subject of concentration. Department permission must be obtained by other students wishing to take this course. ECON 299 or equivalent must be taken before ECON 399. Not open to students with credit in STAT 265 and 266.
ECON 323 International Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the principles of international economics and the applications to economic policy. Topics include international trade in goods and financial assets, trade policy and exchange rate determination. Note: Not open to students with credit in or enrolled in ECON 421 or 422. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 331 Labor Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and empirical evidence concerning the supply of and demand for labor services, wage differentials, and the impact of unions, with particular reference to Canadian contemporary issues. Some of the policy issues to be discussed are income maintenance, unemployment insurance, and minimum wage legislation. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 341 Money and Banking =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Financial intermediation, commercial banking, central banking, securities markets, and regulation of the banking and financial sectors, the money supply process and monetary control. Prerequisite: ECON 282 or consent of Department. Students may not receive credit for both ECON 341 and FIN 414.
ECON 350 The Economics of Public Expenditures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of public sector expenditures in Canada. The rationale for government spending and the problems in the provision of public services. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or equivalent.
ECON 353 Taxation Policy and Structure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of the Canadian tax structure and its role in attaining certain goals of society; requirements for an optimal tax structure. Prerequisite or corequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 357 Health Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Resource allocation and public policy in health care, including determinants of health status, market structures, incentives and the effects of imperfect information. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or equivalent, or consent of Department.
ECON 365 Resource Economics =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues in the production of exhaustible and renewable natural resources, including exploration, extraction, and taxation; scarcity and pricing; contemporary Canadian resource policy issues. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department. Students may not receive credit for both ECON 365 and AREC 365.
ECON 366 Energy Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The economics of producing and consuming energy: pricing, role in economic growth; energy sources and markets; the role of government; regulation and other energy policy issues. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 373 Industrial Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the behavior and performance of firms in different market structures and discussion of public policy toward the different structures. Note: Not open to students with credit in ECON 471 or 472. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or equivalent.
ECON 384 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for majors and Honors students in Economics. Extensions and applications of microeconomic theory: intertemporal choice, risk, uncertainty and expected utility; oligopoly and game theory; externalities, public goods, adverse selection, moral hazard, and asymmetric information; general equilibrium. Prerequisites: ECON 281 and 299 or equivalent.
ECON 385 Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for majors and Honors students in Economics. Theories of stabilization policy; expectations; the government budget constraint; inflation and unemployment; business cycles and growth; theories of aggregate consumption, investment, money demand, and money supply. Prerequisites: ECON 281, 282 and 299 or equivalent.
ECON 386 Applications of Mathematics to Economics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elements of logic and set theory, linear algebra, differential calculus and their conjunction, as used in classical and modern economic analysis. Prerequisites: ECON 281, 282, 299; and MATH 125 or equivalent.
ECON 387 Applications of Mathematics to Economics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Difference and differential equations, linear inequalities, convexity, programming; assorted theorems of special use in modern economic analysis. Prerequisite: ECON 386.
ECON 399 Introductory Econometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). An elementary treatment of the major topics in econometrics with emphasis on applied regression methods. Prerequisites: ECON 281 and 282 and ECON 299 or equivalent. Note: Not open to students with credit in AREC 313 or ECON 408 or MGTSC 413 or 414 or 417 or 419 or STAT 341.
ECON 400 Honors Essay: Fourth-Year Honors Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Required for fourth-year honors students choosing the honors essay route. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Only open to students registered in the Economics Honors Essay Route. Credit will not be granted for both ECON 497 and ECON 400.
ECON 410 Pacific Rim Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analyzes the role of particular markets and institutions in selected Pacific Rim economies. Special emphasis is given to either China or Japan; students should consult the Department of Economics to find which country is being emphasized in a given year. Prerequisites: ECON 281 or equivalent.
ECON 412 European Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of economic theory and research methodology to selected topics in European economic development. Prerequisite: ECON 281.
ECON 414 Economics of Developing Countries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to models of growth and development; the role of agriculture, industry, finance, and trade in structural transformation of developing countries; approaches to development planning. Prerequisite: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 418 Topics in Canadian Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: ECON 281 or consent of Department.
ECON 421 International Trade Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nature and relevance of international trade; early trade doctrines; the theory of comparative advantage, classical and modern approaches and empirical evidence for them; new approaches to the pure theory of international trade; economic growth and international trade; market imperfections and trade; commercial policy; economic integration and the gains from trade. Prerequisites: ECON 281 and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100 or consent of Department.
ECON 422 International Payments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Types of international transactions, macroeconomics in an open economy, exchange rates, balance of payments adjustments, and other issues in the international monetary system. Prerequisites: ECON 281, 282 and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100, or consent of Department.
ECON 423 Topics in International Trade and Development in India Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). International trade and economic development from the perspective of India. Emphasis given to trade policy, poverty, inequality, productivity, and labor markets in India. Prerequisites: ECON 281 and 299 or consent of Department.
ECON 431 Labor Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include demand for labor, supply of labor, wage differentials, trade union behavior, the minimum wage, education and income distribution, discrimination, mandatory retirement, and non-market work. Prerequisites: ECON 281 and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100, or consent of Department.
ECON 442 The Economics of Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The measurement of risk; portfolio analysis; hedging and speculation; market microstructure; asset pricing and market equilibrium. Prerequisites: ECON 281, STAT 141 or equivalent, and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100 or equivalent. Students may not receive credit for both ECON 442 and FIN 412.
ECON 450 Topics in Public Expenditure and Fiscal Federalism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Possibilities and limitations of efficiency and equity of markets and government intervention. Prerequisites: ECON 281, and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100, or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in ECON 455.
ECON 462 Urban Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Urban spatial structure, residential land use, firm location decisions, housing, transportation, and urban public finance. Prerequisites: ECON 281, and MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100, or consent of Department.
ECON 467 Environmental and Natural Resource Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Environmental and natural resource law; domestic and global policy issues related to renewable and non-renewable resources. Prerequisites: MATH 114 (or 113 or 117 or 144) or SCI 100, ECON 281, and one of ECON 269 or equivalent, ECON 365, ECON 366, or AREC 365. Not open to students with credit in ECON 466 or ENCS 473.
ECON 471 Strategic Behavior of the Firm Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Oligopoly theory, cartel formation, product differentiation and advertising, entry into markets and strategic entry deterrence, and research and development. Prerequisites: ECON 384 or consent of Department.
ECON 472 Market Power: Theory and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Market definition and measurement of market power. Canadian competition policy, including merger, predation, abuse of dominance, price discrimination, tie-in sales, exclusive dealing, resale price maintenance, collusion and bid rigging. Prerequisites: ECON 384 or consent of Department.
ECON 481 Advanced Microeconomic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Consumer and producer theory, and selected topics. Prerequisites: ECON 384 and 386 or consent of Department.
ECON 482 Advanced Macroeconomic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Business cycle theory, microfoundations of macro models, government budget constraints, expectations formation, the open economy, and representative agent optimizing models. Prerequisites: ECON 385 and 386.
ECON 484 Game Theory and Economic Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of structure and equilibrium of games. Applications to economic problems such as bargaining, auctions and collusion. Prerequisites: ECON 384 and 299.
ECON 485 Macroeconomic Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of the objectives, instruments and methods of macroeconomics policy using contemporary macroeconomics theory and examples from the policy experience of Canada and other nations. Prerequisites: ECON 385 or consent of Department.
ECON 497 Econometric Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Econometric problems and techniques with emphasis on regression methods and hypothesis testing. Single equation techniques and introduction to simultaneous equation systems. Matrix algebra is used extensively. Prerequisites: ECON 386, 387 and 399 or equivalent. Prerequisite or Corequisite: ECON 481 and 482 or consent of the Department. Not open to students with credit for ECON 408. Credit will not be granted for both ECON 497 and 400.
Graduate Courses
ECON 503 Microeconomic Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Producer and consumer behavior; partial equilibrium models of perfectly and imperfectly competitive markets; Walrasian general equilibrium; welfare economics. Prerequisites: ECON 386 and 387, 481 and 482.
ECON 505 Microeconomic Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Choice under uncertainty; contingent claims and models of general equilibrium under uncertainty; markets with information asymmetries; non-cooperative game theory, games of incomplete information, repeated games, and bargaining theory. Prerequisite: ECON 503.
ECON 509 Time Series Methods in Financial Econometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may include ARIMA modelling, spectral analysis, state-space models and the Kalman filter, nonstationary analysis, vector autoregressions, conditional heteroskedasticity and nonlinear models. Prerequisites: ECON 407 and 408 or equivalent.
ECON 512 Economic Development I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The techniques of development planning; qualitative and quantitative problems associated with the drafting and implementation of plans and programs; assessment of internal and external resources available for development and problems of measurement and mobilization of resources.
ECON 513 Economic Development II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic policy alternatives in a context of growth and development; problems of inflation, balance of payments, disequilibrium, concentration of growth effects; the role of international aid and other external measures.
ECON 521 International Economics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: ECON 481 and 482, ECON 421 and 422 recommended.
ECON 522 International Economics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECON 531 Labor Economics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Factors influencing the supply of, and demand for, labor services and the process of relative wage determination in the long and short run. Determination of money wage levels, aggregate labor-force participation, and the level and structure of aggregate employment and unemployment.
ECON 532 Labor Economics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the theories, institutions, and policy issues related to labor markets. Emphasis is given to the interaction between theory and empirical analysis.
ECON 540 Monetary Economics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: ECON 481 and 482.
ECON 542 Economics of Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course surveys Asset Pricing Theory with an emphasis on the utility-based discount-factor approach. The discount factor provides a unifying framework for the evaluation of most classes of assets including stocks, bonds, and derivatives. In particular, the course reviews mean- variance analysis, factor pricing, discrete time models, and classical results in continuous time, such as the Black and Scholes option Pricing Formula. These theoretical models are also illustrated by empirical applications.
ECON 550 Public Expenditure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory of the role of the public sector in a market economy; market failures, income redistribution, public choice, and fiscal federalism.
ECON 553 Economics of Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Effects of taxes on allocation, distribution and stabilization objectives. Evaluation of major taxes with particular attention paid to efficiency and incidence considerations.
ECON 557 Health Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and applied issues in the determination of health models and a survey of contemporary health economic policy issues.
ECON 566 Environmental Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic theory and policy relating to environmental problems; welfare and public policy issues in environmental decision making. Environmental law; transboundary pollution; economic instruments for pollution control.
ECON 570 Strategic Behavior of the Firm Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Game theory; oligopoly theory; dynamic price competition; cartel formation; product differentiation; and advertising; entry and strategic entry deterrence; research and development.
ECON 571 Market Power: Theory and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Market definition and measurement of market power. Principles of competition policy, including merger, predation, abuse of dominance, price discrimination, vertical market restrictions, collusion and bid rigging.
ECON 572 The Economics of Regulation: Theory and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic foundations of regulation. This course covers problems of natural monopoly, incentive regulation, deregulation, environmental regulation, insurance and financial regulation, universal service obligation, network access pricing, and product quality regulation.
ECON 581 Macroeconomic Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the core topics in macroeconomic theory. These will generally include methods of modelling output, employment, prices, business cycles, and macroeconomic policy. Prerequisite or corequisite: ECON 481 and 482 or equivalent.
ECON 582 Macroeconomic Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course extends the analysis of ECON 581 and introduces students to more advanced issues. Prerequisite: ECON 581 or equivalent.
ECON 591 Graduate Research Workshop I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will aid students in identifying and developing a research topic, and develop skills in the writing and presentation of research. Students will be expected to present, write critiques of, and participate in discussions of published articles or working papers.
ECON 598 Econometric Theory and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced treatment of estimation, inference and econometric problems and techniques, including the use of matrix operations and statistical distribution theory, with an emphasis on applied econometric analysis. Prerequisites: ECON 481 and 482 or equivalent, and an advanced undergraduate level course in econometrics. Note: Not open to students with credit in ECON 506.
ECON 599 Applied Econometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of economic theory in the process of specification and estimation of models. Interpretation and critical evaluation of applied work by means of selected topics in economics and econometrics. Prerequisite: ECON 598 or equivalent.
ECON 608 Topics in Econometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECON 672 Topics in Industrial Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECON 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
ECON 999 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: ECON 503, 581, 598, and 599.
#
Education
EDU
Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDU 100 Contexts of Education =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the different contexts of professional practice within education. It critically examines the complex social relationships among educators as professionals and learners as participants in educational institutions. Teacher identity will be explored as a dynamic, reformative process in response to competing tensions that require an awareness of the positionality of educators. Preservice teachers will learn about the relationships between education and practice that are nested in social relations of learning that are also economic, political, and cultural. Engagement from a variety of perspectives they will develop professional knowledge for critical reconstructive practice. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in EDU 250, 300 or equivalent. [Department of Elementary Education, Department of Secondary Education]
EDU 210 Introduction to Educational Technology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course examines frameworks, trends, issues and futuristic scenarios on the role of technology in education. Students will gain hands-on experience of using technology, with a special emphasis on strategies for integrating technology into the school curriculum. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 210 and EDIT 202. Prerequisite: EDU 100 or pre/corequisite EDU 300 (After Degree students). May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. [Department of Educational Psychology]
EDU 211 Aboriginal Education and Contexts for Professional and Personal Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). In this course, preservice teachers will continue to develop knowledge of Aboriginal peoples’ histories, educational experiences, and knowledge systems, ways of knowing and being and will further develop an understanding of the implications of this knowledge to the professional roles and obligations for teachers. Students will engage in a learning process of self- and-other awareness, and will be supported by Indigenous educators, Faculty members and Elders. Prerequisite: EDU 100 or pre/corequisite EDU 300 (After Degree students). [Department of Educational Policy Studies]
EDU 300 Contexts of Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the different contexts of professional practice within education. It critically examines the complex social relationships among educators as professionals and learners as participants in educational institutions. Teacher identity will be explored as a dynamic, reformative process in response to competing tensions that require an awareness of the positionality of educators. Preservice teachers will learn about the relationships between education and practice that are nested in social relations of learning that are also economic, political, and cultural. Engagement from a variety of perspectives they will develop professional knowledge for critical reconstructive practice. Note: EDU 300 is for After Degree students only. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in EDU 100, 250 or equivalent. [Department of Elementary Education, Department of Secondary Education]
Graduate Courses
EDU 502 Guided Individual Study in Educational Studies Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Restricted to students in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program.
EDU 503 Foundations of Curriculum Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides an introduction to conceptions of curriculum and their effects on pedagogy with particular emphasis on discerning and interpreting how personal, social, cultural, and political circumstances collude in the shaping of educational practices. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of Calendar.
EDU 510 Fundamentals of Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Explores the findings of educational research, and works to apply the results of research to educational problems. Focuses on conceptualizing methods of educational research to specific and individual educational sites and issues. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 511 Introduction to School Improvement Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Introduces the current state of knowledge, research and theory in the field of education. Focuses upon teaching and learning within schools and other educational organizations in ways that synthesize educational experience with professional research knowledge. Studies educational change that improves organizations. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 512 Leadership in Educational Settings Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Examines the historical context of current thinking about educational leadership. Explores how leadership literature informs practice, while critically examining that literature from both theoretical and practical perspectives. Analyzes values and ethical principles in school leadership; complex dilemmas of educational leadership; and, works to develop a personal philosophy of educational leadership. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 513 Leadership for Educational Change Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Introduces the relationship of research to educational leadership. Focuses upon synthesizing extant research literature and the need to address a specific leadership need within a school site using appropriate research methods. Studies how educational research can inform leaders in carrying out school improvement and bringing about educational change. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 514 Planning for Educational Change Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Introduces how educational research can enhance educational change toward school improvement. Focuses on utilizing appropriate research methods to create a site-based research proposal for a specific school site. Focuses on planning educational research that improves schools. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 515 Conducting Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A supervised research assignment project to develop and apply knowledge and skills related to data collection, data analysis techniques, and research report preparation. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 575 Theory and Practice in Educational Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an overview of key topics and issues in educational technology as well as an introduction to basic skills in educational technology development. Course topics include ethics, philosophy, history, research and evaluation, fluency with information technology, multimodal literacies, simulations and visualization, sociological issues, social networking and video/image production. The course is intended to expose students to a broad array of issues related to and influencing Educational Technology. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 597 Theory and Practice in Educational Technology and EDU 575.
EDU 593 Special Seminar in Educational Studies: Selected Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Content varies from term to term. Topics announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript carries title descriptive of content. May be repeated. Prerequisite: Registration in Master of Education in Educational Studies Program. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 597 Special Seminar in Educational Studies: Selected Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Content varies from term to term. Topics announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript carries title descriptive of content. May be repeated. Prerequisite: Registration in Master of Education in Educational Studies Program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment refer to the Fees; Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDU 900 Program Synthesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A reflection and synthesize of learning from the Master of Education in Educational Studies in relation to the concepts of leadership and school/educational improvement that are the foundations of the program. Prerequisite: Registration in the Master of Education in Educational Studies program. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
Education - Career Technology Studies
EDCT
Department of Secondary Education Faculty of Education
Note: the course prefix for Education (Career Technology) has changed from EDCTS to EDCT.
Undergraduate Courses
EDCT 400 Conference Seminar Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). Content varies. Topics are announced prior to registration. The transcript will carry a title descriptive of content. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
EDCT 500 Conference Seminar Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Content varies. Topics are announced prior to registration. The transcript will carry a title descriptive of content. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
#
Education - Elementary
EDEL
Department of Elementary Education Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDEL 302 Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to visual arts education for elementary schools. It is comprised of lectures, discussions, audio visual presentations, and hands-on media experiences. No visual arts background necessary. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316.
EDEL 305 Language Arts in the Elementary School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course will introduce the language arts curriculum and will give a broad overview of the knowledge and skills required to implement a language arts program in the elementary school, including oral language, reading and writing. Prerequisite: EDU 100 and 210; pre/corequisite EDU 211. For students in the Elementary After Degree program: pre/corequisite EDU 210, 211, and 300. EDEL 305 is offered as part of Year 3 of the Elementary Program Route.
EDEL 306 Introduction to Language and Literacy Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides students with the background in language and literacy development needed to work with Indigenous children from diverse language and literacy backgrounds. The focus is on planning for language teaching and supporting Indigenous languages in the classroom.
EDEL 316 Communication Through Mathematics Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to the teaching and learning of mathematics in the elementary classroom. The focus will be on using curriculum, strategies, planning and resources to meet student needs. Prerequisite: EDU 100 and 210; pre/corequisite EDU 211. For students in the Elementary After Degree program: pre/corequisite EDU 210, 211, and 300. EDEL 316 is offered as part of Year 3 of the Elementary Program Route.
EDEL 321 Introduction to Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to prepare students to teach Physical Education effectively in an elementary school setting. The goals to this end integrate understanding of child development, physical education, health, curriculum and pedagogy and making curricula links. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316.
EDEL 325 Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theory and practice of teaching music in the elementary classroom. Special emphasis on hands-on experience with techniques, strategies, and materials appropriate for K-6. No previous experience with music notation necessary. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316. Students cannot receive credit for both EDEL 325 and EDEL 328.
EDEL 328 Music Literacy: The Child Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theory and practice of teaching music literacy in the elementary classroom. Special emphasis on hands-on experience with techniques, strategies, and materials appropriate for K-6 including those employed in the Kodály approach. Previous experience with music notation recommended. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316. Students cannot receive credit for both EDEL 325 and EDEL 328.
EDEL 330 Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to teaching elementary children about science and ‘design and make’ technology. Such themes as children’s learning, science/technology/society connections, the Alberta program, planning and instruction and assessing children’s progress will be explored. Students may not receive credit for both EDEL 330 and EDEL 372. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316.
EDEL 335 Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Social Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to planning, resources, curriculum and strategies for meeting students’ needs through social studies. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDEL 305 or 316.
EDEL 355 Teaching and Learning in Early Childhood Settings Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to Early Childhood Education with an emphasis on early learning environments that meet the diverse needs of young children, and the roles of the early childhood educators within these environments. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 394 Selected Topics in Elementary Education I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 395 Group Project I Elementary Education Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 404 Developing Literacy: Pre-School to Grade Three Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This senior education course focuses on the teaching and learning of literacy in Early Childhood settings (pre-school to grade three). The course explores instructional strategies, materials and classroom organization, based on contemporary theory and research. Prerequisite: EDEL 305 or equivalent introductory course in language arts education.
EDEL 406 Diagnostic Teaching of Reading and Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on assessment techniques for reading and writing, provides information on administering these techniques to elementary school children and develops an understanding of how to interpret the information collected. Planning and implementing reading and writing instruction and selecting materials from a diagnostic perspective are also included in the course. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in language learning; or consent of Department.
EDEL 407 Reading in the Elementary School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course addresses the nature of the reading process. The development of children’s reading abilities, organizing an environment for instruction in reading, teaching, reading strategies, the reading-writing connections, reading across curriculum, and the assessment of reading. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in language learning; or consent of Department.
EDEL 408 Writing in the Elementary School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include the development of children’s writing abilities, the nature of the writing process, organizing an environment for instruction in writing, teaching strategies, the reading-writing connection, writing across the curriculum, and the assessment of writing. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in language learning; or consent of Department.
EDEL 409 Teaching Literature in Elementary Schools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include an exploration of the various genres of children’s literature, authors and illustrators, strategies for planning and implementing a literature-based program across the elementary curriculum, response activities, and resources for teaching. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in language learning; or consent of Department.
EDEL 411 Literacy Development through Drama and Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course elucidates the role of drama as a teaching/learning medium in an elementary school program studies. Students sample and question current writing in the field and actively participate in various drama modes. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in language learning; or consent of Department.
EDEL 412 Teaching Language Arts in First Nations, Inuit and Métis Contexts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to help prepare teachers to develop learners’ oral and written language skills in elementary classrooms, particularly for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis (FNIM) students. It offers an overview, within the Canadian context, of the linguistic, psycholinguistic, and sociolinguistic backgrounds, strengths and needs of FNIM children in elementary classrooms. Topics include language acquisition, bilingualism, bidialectalism, linguistic diversity, language maintenance and loss, teaching Standard English as a second language or dialect, and materials evaluation and development. Prerequisite: EDEL 305 or consent of the Department.
EDEL 413 Teaching Language and Literacy in Multilingual Classrooms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to help prepare teachers to develop learner’s English language and literacies in elementary classrooms, particularly in classrooms where there are children from homes where standard English may not be the first language or dialect. Students will be asked to extend their knowledge of language and literacy instruction to consider the sociolinguistic diversity they will find in contemporary classrooms. Prerequisite: EDEL 305.
EDEL 415 Issues in Elementary Mathematics Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focus is on current issues in mathematics education related to teacher and student roles, mathematical tasks and tools, and the learning environment. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in mathematics education; or consent of Department.
EDEL 420 Curriculum and Pedagogy in Elementary School Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: An introductory curriculum and pedagogy course in elementary school physical education; or consent of Department.
EDEL 425 The Child’s Voice: Techniques for the Children’s Choir Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the development of healthy and artistic singing in the children’s choir. Students will analyze and conduct choral literature and observe choral rehearsals. Prerequisite: MUSIC 230; or consent of Department.
EDEL 427 Music Creativity: Teaching and Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the philosophy and pedagogical principles of Carl Orff’s Schulwerk. The course focuses on Orff orchestration skills and the application of the Orff Approach in curricular planning. Pre/corequisite: MUSIC 207 or consent of Department.
EDEL 433 Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Elementary Science II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course consists of children’s conceptions of the earth and sky and ways teachers can design teaching strategies to assist children in restructuring these conceptions. Specific topics include air and aerodynamics; sky science; weather watch; and rocks and minerals. Prerequisite: EDEL 330.
EDEL 435 Pedagogy in Elementary School Social Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An investigation of the underlying principles and practical applications of curriculum and pedagogy in social studies. Prerequisite: An introductory curriculum and instruction course in elementary Social Studies; or EDEL 335; or consent of Department.
EDEL 445 Teaching Second Languages in the Elementary School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theory and practice of teaching second languages in the elementary classroom. Focus is on curricular planning, teaching methods and techniques, materials and resources, and assessment. Will include a field placement in an off-campus second language, immersion, or bilingual classroom for one half day per week. Prerequisite: Successful completion of the Introductory Professional Year and a working knowledge of the language to be taught or consent of Department.
EDEL 451 Methods and Programs in the Teaching of English as a Second Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed for those interested in ESL teaching at the K-6 levels. Course focuses include orientation and assessment of ESL students, program planning, ESL teaching methods and techniques, integrating language and content, and ESL materials and resources. This course will include a field placement in an off-campus ESL classroom one morning per week. Prerequisite: EDPY 416; or consent of Department.
EDEL 455 Play as a Teaching and Learning Strategy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines how choice and self-direction can enhance children’s learning and thinking in early childhood settings. Students will be involved in planning and evaluating integrated, emergent curriculum projects involving learning in and through play. The conception of play as a teaching strategy will be investigated in relation to cultural, philosophical and historical traditions, current practices and recent research. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 457 Theory and Practice in Early Childhood Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Gives students an in-depth understanding of some of the major contemporary theories and approaches to Early Childhood Education, and examines how they can be utilized with young children from diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds to enhance their learning. Students will be involved in planning, implementing and documenting integrated curriculum projects in a variety of early childhood settings. Prerequisite: Introductory Field Experience or consent of the Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 458 Practical Experience with Curriculum Models in Early Childhood Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). This lab-based course will provide opportunities to gain practical experiences in a variety of early childhood education settings. These include observations, analysis and discussion in relation to the examination of contemporary Early Childhood Education theories in EDEL 457. Many of the field experience sites require all volunteers to have a criminal record check and a child welfare check. Prior to beginning this course it is recommended that all students have these checks completed. Prerequisites: EDEL 355 or consent of Department. Students must be registered concurrently in EDEL 457. Students cannot receive credit for both EDEL 458 and 456.
EDEL 460 Sustaining Language and Culture through Traditional Knowledge and Practices Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines approaches to Indigenous language and culture revitalization and their application to everyday life. Topics include traditional worldviews, the life cycle, rites of passage, community feasts, cultural celebrations, and festivals (but nothing of a sacred nature). The aim of this course is to create awareness about strategies Indigenous people are taking to sustain, preserve, and protect traditional practices. Elders serve as resources in the class. Prerequisites: EDEL 306 or consent of Department.
EDEL 461 Second Language Acquisition: Teaching Indigenous Languages in an Immersion Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course addresses current principles underlying second language teaching and learning in an immersion context. Foundations in oral language learning, methods, and strategies will be discussed in relation to children and adults learning an Indigenous language as a second language. Prerequisite: EDEL 306 or consent of the Department.
EDEL 462 Developing Class Materials and Curriculum for Indigenous Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides teachers with practical tools and hands- on experience in developing a wide range of material for Indigenous language classrooms and will improve their ability to use the language for communicative purposes. Grounded on research on effective language pedagogy and second language acquisition, this course will focus on holistic approaches to teaching language. Prerequisite: EDEL 306 and/or consent of the Department.
EDEL 463 Assessment in Indigenous Language Classrooms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the assessment of Indigenous language learning in bilingual, immersion, and core language classrooms. A range of theoretical perspectives will be examined in the field of child language acquisition and techniques for assessing Indigenous language learning. Prerequisite: EDEL 306 or consent of the Department.
EDEL 470 Bridging Cultures: Diverse Ways of Knowing in Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will consider science from the perspectives of history, culture and Indigenous ways of knowing. Specifically, the course will consider the historical, philosophical, and wisdom traditions of Indigenous knowledge systems as a cultural bridge to a greater awareness of science. We will also focus on the particular subject area cultural histories and collectively consider the critical contributions that these varying perspectives could play in classroom contexts. One of the unifying messages of this course is that Aboriginal ways of knowing provide a unique opportunity for teachers to rethink and reframe their approaches to scientific teaching and learning. Prerequisite: EDEL 330.
EDEL 490 Supervised Independent Study in Elementary Education II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 495 Seminar in Group Projects in Elementary Education II Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 496 Group Projects in Elementary Education II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 499 Synthesis and Integration in Elementary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides opportunity for preservice teachers to synthesize selected topics in elementary education in relation to field experiences and academic work, thus promoting deeper understanding of the interconnectedness of curriculum, teaching practices, varied educational contexts, children as diverse learners, and teachers’ professional growth and identity. Prerequisite: Successful completion of field experiences from the Introductory Professional Year and the Advanced Professional Year.
Graduate Courses
EDEL 505 Theory and Practice in Language Arts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines a variety of theoretical perspectives on language and literacy and explores their implications for work with children. Questions of language acquisition, the role of language in learning, the development of literacy, and sociocultural influences are explored. Prerequisite: Equivalent to *3 in language arts education, or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 508 Diagnosis and Remediation of Reading and Writing Problems I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Focuses on the acquisition of skills in diagnostic assessment and remediation of reading and writing difficulties in children and adults. The influences of various theoretical perspectives and social issues on diagnosis and remediation are also explored. Students must enroll in EDEL 508 and 509 in the same year. Pre- or corequisite: EDEL 505 or consent of Department.
EDEL 509 Diagnosis and Remediation of Reading and Writing Problems II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Provides advanced study in the diagnosis and remediation of reading and writing difficulties. Students will develop expertise with a variety of assessment and intervention strategies while extending their understanding of how various theories and social issues affect the nature and extent of the support provided to people with reading and writing difficulties. Students must enroll in EDEL 508 and 509 in the same year. Prerequisite: EDEL 508 or consent of Department.
EDEL 510 Children’s Literature in the Elementary School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on approaches to teaching across the curriculum that will allow students to explore the value of literature in the lives of children; the development of a literature program; the creation of environments that enable children to respond to and grow through literature; the relationships between literature and literacy; and current research in literature in education. Prerequisite: Equivalent to *3 in language arts education, or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 511 Leadership in Language Arts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores the development and implementation of elementary language arts programs in schools. The roles played by teachers, consultants and administrators in developing, implementing, refining and monitoring language arts programs are analyzed in relation to concepts of leadership in language arts. Prerequisite: EDEL 505 or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 514 Early Literacy Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores contemporary issues and concerns pertaining to the literacy development of young children. Aspects of theory, research, policy and practice are examined. Students will acquire a depth and breadth of understanding of how young children (up to eight years) become successful readers and writers. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 515 Developing Writing Abilities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores current issues in writing theory and pedagogy. The focus is on the development of writing abilities of elementary and middle years students, in a variety of forms and media, in school and home/community contexts. Prerequisite: EDEL 505 or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 516 Contemporary Issues in Elementary Mathematics Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores contemporary issues related to the teaching and learning of mathematics in elementary schools. Aspects of theory, research, policy and practice are examined. Prerequisite: Equivalent to 3 credits in mathematics education or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 517 Classroom-Based Research in Elementary Mathematics Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current issues in teaching and learning mathematics will be examined through classroom-based research and practice. Classroom events, mathematical tasks, and student work will be used as sites for critique, inquiry and investigation into theory and practice of teaching mathematics to children. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 525 Trends and Issues in Classroom Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on elements of teaching and learning in relation to actual needs, problems, issues of elementary school, classroom practice as identified by participants. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 530 Language, Inquiry and School Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). School science is framed by a perspective which acknowledges the social and cultural nature of learning in science and the ways in which language mediates the social practices of specific communities. Explores the practices of talking, reading and writing in school science. Prerequisite: a 400-level science education course or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 533 Theory and Methodology in Second Language Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course examines second language acquisition theory and research in the context of classroom applications. It also critically evaluates a wide range of language teaching methods and strategies. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 535 Socio-cultural Aspects of Second Language Learning and Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course examines research on social and cultural aspects of second language acquisition and explores the relevance of this research for second-language teaching practice. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 540 Introduction to Teacher-Librarianship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the management of school library programs and services. Note: Not open to students with credit in LIS 540 or EDES 540. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 541 Introduction to Resource Organization and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the management and organization of print and digital resources in a school library collection. Note: Not open to students with credit in EDES 541. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 542 Theory and Practice of Inquiry-Based Teaching and Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the nature and culture of inquiry and the integration of inquiry in teaching and learning. Note: Not open to students with credit in EDES 542. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 543 Introduction to Contemporary Literacies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the foundations of contemporary literacies, literacy in the 21st century, and literacy leadership for teachers and teacher-librarians. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 544 Introduction to Emerging Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the use of emerging technologies in schools and school libraries with an emphasis on how they might be used in personal, professional and teaching and learning situations. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 545 Integration of Emerging Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the integration of emerging technologies into schools and school libraries with an emphasis on the trends, issues, opportunities and challenges associated with living and working in digital age classrooms and libraries. Note: Not open to students with credit in EDES 545. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 546 Introduction to Resource Selection and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates the selection and evaluation of print and digital resources for children and young adults in schools and school libraries. Note: Not open to students with credit in EDES 546. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 549 The Leadership Role of the Teacher-Librarian Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores and critically evaluates current trends and issues in school library leadership. Pre-requisites: EDEL 540, EDEL 542, EDEL 544, or consent of the department. Note: Not open to students with credit in EDES 549. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 557 Research in Program Development in Early Childhood Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EDEL 556 or consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 559 Principles of Curriculum Planning and Pedagogy in Early Childhood Settings Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A course in planning and implementing integrated curricula for children from preschool to grade three building upon principles of child development and learning. Students may not receive credit for both EDEL 558 and EDEL 559. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 561 Processes of Curriculum Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the ways in which curricula are produced, implemented, and evaluated. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 566 Ethnographic Research Methodology in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine ethnographic research theory, studies, issues, methods and practices as they apply to communities and classrooms. Ethnography takes the position that human behaviour and the ways in which people construct and make meaning of their worlds and their lives are highly variable and locally specific. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
EDEL 567 Introduction to Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This introductory research methodology course is intended to support graduate students’ understanding of the many ways in which educational research is conceptualized and conducted. Students will develop their ability to read educational research critically and with understanding in order to support their work as researchers and practicing professionals. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 590 Directed Individual Study in Elementary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 595 Special Seminar in Elementary Education: Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDEL 596 Special Seminar in Elementary Education Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0).
EDEL 597 Special Seminar in Elementary Education Œ1-12 (variable) (variable, variable).
EDEL 599 Capstone Exercise Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 12 hours). The required capping exercise for the course- based MEd program will consist of a presentation based on one piece of work that students select from their course assignments completed during the MEd program. The piece of work and type of presentation is chosen in consultation with their advisor according to departmental guidelines. Students will register in this course in the final term of their coursework.
EDEL 605 Theories and Models of Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an advanced and in-depth examination of theories and models of language acquisition and development. The characteristics, purposes, and limitations of language theories and models are explored through the critical study of a range of theoretical perspectives. Prerequisite: EDEL 505 or consent of Department.
EDEL 650 Curriculum Foundations and Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A required course for doctoral students in the Department of Elementary Education. Engages students in advanced examination of the historical foundations of the curriculum field, contemporary issues in curriculum, and current influences on curriculum. Through readings, discussions, and assignments, course participants will examine a number of perspectives for inquiring into educational practice, situating their own practice within the wider context of the field of curriculum studies, interpreting the language of curriculum, and considering the role of teachers in mediating curriculum with their students. The epistemological, ontological, axiological, and ideological bases for the forms of curriculum theory and inquiry will be studied. Prerequisite: EDEL 561 or consent of the Department.
EDEL 660 Advanced Research in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This is a required course for doctoral students in the Department of Elementary Education. Provides students with opportunities to explore issues in educational research from a philosophical and historical perspective. Prior to choosing methods and data sources, a researcher must first be aware of and be able to defend their theoretical framework which is based on an understanding of ontology, epistemology, methodology and ethics. The purpose of this course is to expose students to the perspectives, issues and questions in these four areas so that they may begin to develop a philosophical understanding of the research process. Prerequisite: EDEL 567 or consent of the Department.
EDEL 665 Qualitative Research Methods in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides for in-depth study of qualitative research. Attention is given to research design, data collection, analysis, interpretation, and reporting. Credit cannot be given for this course if the student has already completed EDEL 568.
EDEL 667 Interpretive Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intended to support participants in examining the topics within interpretive inquiry in depth; writing about their research approaches, and undertaking analyses and interpretations of data. Intended to be helpful to students wishing to undertake research that can be understood as basic or generic qualitative research or as interpretive inquiry. Prerequisite: EDEL 665 or equivalent.
EDEL 690 Individual Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Comprehensive problems in Curriculum and Instruction- Elementary. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 691 Individual Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, variable). Comprehensive problems in Curriculum and Instruction-Elementary. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDEL 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Education - Elementary and Secondary
EDES
Department of Elementary Education Department of Secondary Education Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDES 145 Mixed Chorus Œ0 (fi 2) (two term, 0-0-4). A music ensemble designed to provide education students with practical experience in the organization, administration and literature of the mixed chorus. Note: This is a credit/no credit course.
EDES 251 Education Handbell Ringers I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). This course examines repertoire, performance practice, rehearsal techniques and program administration of the handbell choir through a process of practical application. Prerequisite: successful completion of an audition of music reading skills.
EDES 301 Introduction to Teaching in the Middle Years Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an overview of the roles of the teacher in middle years and provides an overview of the middle level curriculum. This course will provide an analysis of the unique nature of middle years education and middle years student. Emphasis is placed upon strategies for planning instruction and assessment within a positive classroom environment. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.) Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDES 340 Active and Interactive Curriculum and Instruction in the Middle Years Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Based on the distinct developmental and societal needs of adolescents, this course will examine the social and curricular frameworks for learning and teaching. It will include theoretical and practical implications of the active and interactive nature of adolescent learning, incorporating a wide range of process and strategies. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 348 Reading in the Junior and Senior High School Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on reading strategies for learning all subject areas, with an emphasis on comprehension and critical-thinking.
EDES 351 Education Handbell Ringers II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). This course examines repertoire, performance practice, rehearsal techniques and program administration of the handbell choir through a process of practical application. Prerequisite: EDES 251
EDES 361 Introduction to Curriculum and Instruction in Middle Years Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to visual arts education for middle years. It is comprised of lectures, discussions, audio-visual presentations, and hands-on media experiences. No visual arts background necessary. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.) Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDES 362 Language Arts in the Middle Years Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce the language arts curriculum and will give a broad overview of the knowledge and skills required to implement a language arts program in middle years classrooms. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 363 Communication Through Mathematics in Middle Years Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to the teaching and learning of mathematics in the middle years. The focus will be on using curriculum, strategies, planning and resources to meet student needs. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 364 Curriculum and Instruction in Middle Years Physical Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to prepare students to teach Physical Education effectively in the middle years. The goals to this end integrate understanding of child development, physical education, health, curriculum and instruction and making curricula links. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 365 Curriculum and Instruction in Middle Years Science Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an introduction to teaching middle years children about science and ‘design and make’ technology. Such themes as children’s learning, science/technology/society connections, the Alberta program, planning and instruction and assessing children’s progress will be explored. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 366 Curriculum and Instruction in Middle Years Social Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to planning, resources, curriculum and strategies for meeting middle years students’ needs through social studies. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 401 Conference Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
EDES 409 Aboriginal Curriculum Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to help educators better understand and interpret the significance of recent curricular initiatives in Alberta and across Canada that emphasize Aboriginal perspectives across subject areas and grade levels. The class will consider the philosophies and wisdom traditions of Aboriginal knowledge systems and the curricular and pedagogical implications of these. The class will also focus in on particular subject area concerns, individually and collectively, and consider the critical contributions that Aboriginal knowledge systems and perspectives could play in these classroom contexts. One of the unifying messages of this course is that Aboriginal curriculum perspectives provide a unique opportunity for teachers to creatively rethink and reframe their approaches to teaching and learning.
EDES 440 Constructing Integrated Curriculum in the Middle Years Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on constructing integrated curriculum for middle years classrooms. Includes the examination of resources and existing middle years curriculum with a view to implementation and assessment. Prerequisite: Introductory Professional Term. (Restricted to students in the Middle Years Program offered at Red Deer.)
EDES 451 Education Handbell Ringers III Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). This course examines repertoire, performance practise, rehearsal techniques and program administration of the handbell choir through a process of practical application. Prerequisite: EDES 351.
Graduate Courses
EDES 501 Conference Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
EDES 502 Conference Seminar Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-6s-0).
EDES 504 Special Topics in Art Process Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-4). This course combines a specific studio focus and an exploration of performance art traditions with the goal of guiding students toward an understanding of the role that the audience plays in art as a form of communication and a way of learning. Prerequisite: *6 in ART and *3 in ART H, or consent of Department.
EDES 509 Teaching Science in Elementary and Secondary Schools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course allows students to consider at the graduate level current trends in learning theory, teaching strategies, program development and assessment which affect teaching science in schools.
EDES 601 Conference Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Education - Field Experience
EDFX
Division of Field Experiences Faculty of Education
Notes
(1) Field Experience courses other than EDFX 476 and 490 are normally not offered in Spring/Summer.
(2) The Fee Index for these courses is one unit higher due to the practicum placement fees. See the Fee Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the calendar.
(3) The course prefix for Education (Field Experience) courses has changed from EDFXP to EDFX.
Undergraduate Courses
EDFX 325 Elementary Route: Introductory Field Experience Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, Full time in schools). Pre/corequisites: EDEL 305, 316. Corequisite: EDPY 303. Note: Successful completion of the on-campus portion of Year 3 is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 325. Requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Students are not permitted to enroll or work on courses additional to those scheduled in conjunction with the field experience.
EDFX 350 Secondary Route Field Experience for the Introductory Professional Term Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, Full time in schools). Prerequisites: *9 in the Major subject area, EDPY 304, EDU 100/300, 210, 211. Corequisites: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Note: Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Requires payment of an additional field experience fee. Students are not permitted to register in courses additional to those scheduled in conjunction with the IPT.
EDFX 425 Elementary Route: Advanced Field Experience Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, Full time in schools). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Year. Corequisites: EDPY 301. Note: Successful completion of the corequisites is expected prior to students being granted permission to commence EDFX 425. Requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Students are not permitted to enroll or work on courses additional to those scheduled in conjunction with the field experience.
EDFX 450 Secondary Route: Advanced Field Experience Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, Full time in schools). Prerequisites: The Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisites: EDSE 451 and EDSE 4XX (Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Majors II). Note: Successful completion of the prerequisites is expected prior to students being granted permission to commence EDFX 450. Requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Students are not permitted to enroll or work on courses additional to the APT.
EDFX 490 Additional Placement in an Education Related and/or Outside Alberta Context Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Prerequisites: Introductory Field Experience and permission of the Assistant Dean, Field Experiences. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDFX 498 Field Experience in the Elementary School Œ1-12 (variable) (variable, variable). Prerequisite: permission of Professional Officer, Field Experiences. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDFX 499 Field Experience in the Secondary School Œ1-12 (variable) (variable, variable). Prerequisite: permission of Professional Officer, Field Experiences.
#
Education - Instructional Technology
EDIT
Department of Educational Psychology Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDIT 486 Interactive Multimedia =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course emphasizes students as builders of video games as opposed to players of video games and addresses the pedagogy of using this process to teach K-12 students. Lectures will focus on educational theory, specifically, social constructivist and constructionist frameworks and their relevance to current learners and their perspectives on technology use. The lab components will explore various game development environments which are designed for K-12 students. Through the construction of video games, students will learn how to promote problem-solving skills and critical thinking in their own students. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDIT 488 Instructional Technology and Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course treats instructional technology as a communications system for teaching and learning. In addition to exploring communication concepts, the course examines the communications components of visual learning and the specific tools and techniques of digital presentation and interaction. Overviews of current and future practice plus research on communication are included. This course is taught in an alternative delivery format. Prerequisite: EDIT 202 or EDU 210 or EDIT 485 or an introductory course in computing science. Students will not be granted credit for both EDIT 488 and EDPY 488.
Graduate Courses
EDIT 578 Internship in Instructional Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Students will be placed in a professional environment where they will have the opportunity to participate in projects that incorporate educational technology.
EDIT 579 Internship in Instructional Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Students will be placed in a professional environment where they will have the opportunity to participate in projects that incorporate educational technology.
#
Education - Policy Studies
EDPS
Department of Educational Policy Studies Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDPS 310 Managing the Learning Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). This course will assist students in clarifying the influence of social and organizational contexts and structures and help them explore the ways in which teachers can participate as professionals in the process of managing the learning environment. Prerequisite for Secondary Education Route: EDU 100, 210, 211. Pre or corequisite for Elementary Education Route: EDEL 305.
EDPS 341 Concepts of Childhood in History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of those views of childhood which have exerted a significant influence on educational theory and practice over the last 200 years.
EDPS 360 Society and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The changing function and structures of education, with special reference to contemporary Canadian society.
EDPS 401 Selected Topics in Educational Policy Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPS 402 Directed Study in Educational Policy Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPS 410 Ethics and Law in Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the ethical and legal responsibilities of teachers. Among the topics addressed will be the following: punishment and child abuse; freedom of speech and academic freedom in schools; parents’ rights and teachers’ professional autonomy; issues of quality such as inclusive education and the problems of racism and sexism; fairness in assessment and evaluation; teachers’ private lives and public obligations; indoctrination and the teaching of value. It is recommended that students take EDU 100 (EDU 300 for After Degree students), 210, and 211 prior to taking this course. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 411 Cross Cultural Studies in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an ethnographic study of the interrelatedness of educational and cultural practices and how they affect different social groups in Canadian and global contexts. It considers how cultural politics affect schooling, its outcomes, and the range of educational opportunities for different students in relation to their ethnocultural backgrounds. Examining both the historical and contemporary dynamics of schooling, the course examines how the schooling-larger culture interaction shapes the social, political, and economics dimensions of students’ lives.
EDPS 415 Sexuality, Gender, and Culture in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores, in theory and practice, contemporary issues related to sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression in K-12 schools. It draws upon critical scholarship to explore issues related to the construction and regulation of teacher and student identities, school leadership, bullying, violence, and discrimination. We further consider the implications of policy and other targeted educational interventions to help create welcoming, respectful and safe learning and teaching environments. NOTE: Community Service Learning (CSL) is an integral and required component of this course.
EDPS 422 International Development Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the interplay of education and international development in diverse contexts of our world. Theoretical analysis and discussions will focus on different types of education, the histories of international development and globalization, as well as citizenship, social justice and human rights education. These topical foci will be complemented by specialized regional perspectives on the state of education and social development in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Eastern Europe, the Caribbean region and Oceania.
EDPS 425 Global Education: Issues and Strategies for Teachers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores, in theory and practice, how global education in schools can facilitate critical understanding and develop skills and values for building more peaceful futures in local, national, and global contexts. It draws on North and South scholars and educators to clarify underlying conceptual and pedagogical principles of global education and related fields (education for peace, justice, development, human rights, cultural solidarity, environmental care). Exemplars of creative curriculum content and teaching-learning strategies for global literacy will be included.
EDPS 432 The Education of Native Peoples in Canada: An Historical Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An historical examination of the formal education provided Indian, Métis, and Inuit peoples with special attention to Aboriginal, missionary, and federal-provincial educational programs.
EDPS 445 Issues in Middle Years Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course examines a variety of issues and policies affecting Middle Years Education. It focuses on understanding the Middle Years within the structure of the Alberta Education system and identifies contextual variables that affect teaching and learning.
EDPS 456 The Philosophy of Moral Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the philosophical problems that arise in the moral education of students.
EDPS 474 Contemporary Issues in the Education of Native Peoples: A Social Science Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An analysis of current issues of debate in Indian, Métis and Inuit education, with special reference to their social origins.
Graduate Courses
EDPS 501 Conference Course on Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPS 506 Individual Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPS 507 Individual Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
EDPS 509 Research Design and Data Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is a survey course of research design principles, concepts, and applications. Emphasis is on developing research methodologies and understanding data analyses for conducting various types of research. Prerequisite EDPS 508.
EDPS 511 Evolving Concepts in Educational Administration and Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 501 and EDPS 511. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 512 Administrative and Leadership Process in Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 502 and EDPS 512. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 513 Educational Policy and Reform Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The intent of this course is to explore and further our understanding of reforms in education over the past two decades in Canada and other selected OECD countries. Through academic readings, we examine how and why particular policy discourses (e.g. school choice, system accountability) have become accepted in recent years. We further consider the implications of policy reforms for practices within educational organizations. The design of this course reflects the view that reforms cannot be comprehended without considering the social, political, economic and historical contexts in which they arise.
EDPS 514 Gender Issues in Educational Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores the ways in which concepts of gender, leadership, and organizations intersect in the practices of administrators in educational settings. Using gender as an analytical perspective, the course provides an overview of the ways in which feminist and gender-based research challenges traditional theories about leadership in educational organizations. Topics for discussion and re-conceptualization include bureaucracy, power and authority, concepts and locations of leadership, administrative styles and ethics, and current educational policy as they inform practice for gendered subjects in educational settings. The implications of a gendered analysis for the work of educational administrators will be explored. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 515 Sexual and Gender Minorities in Education and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines research and educational practices designed to make sexual and gender minority (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer) identities, histories, voices, and cultures visible in mainstream K-12 education in North America. Students will learn how this research, teaching, and cultural work has sought to (1) interrogate hetero- and gender- normative relationships of power and identity formation, (2) engage queer pedagogy and processes of knowledge production, and (3) develop critical modes of inquiry to investigate the maintenance of the status quo in contemporary schooling.
EDPS 520 Adult Education, Popular Movements and NGOs in the Global South Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the role and nature of adult education and learning processes in social change initiatives being undertaken by development non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and by popular subaltern social movements of pastoralists, peasants, indigenous peoples, rural women and urban poor (shack dwellers) social groups in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean (Global South). These initiatives will be explored in terms of a critical contextual appreciation of the inter/national development project and neoliberal globalization.
EDPS 521 Adult Learning and Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In this course we will examine key issues in adult learning and development, using concepts discussed in the literature. Content areas include theories of adult learning and development, and related concepts such as learning styles and orientations, personality, motivation, and intelligence. Students may not receive credit for both EDAE 521 and EDPS 521.
EDPS 522 Citizenship Education: Global Contexts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on citizenship education as a primary program for the development of societies with special reference to South countries. The concepts as well as the possible practices of citizenship and citizenship education will be analyzed to discern and critique their influence on spaces of educational and social development.
EDPS 523 Education and Development Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analyzes the role of education in the development process from a global perspective, with particular attention paid to Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Explores the various explanations for social, political, and economic development put forward by selected writers. Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 523 and EDPS 523.
EDPS 525 Globalization, Global Education and Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will develop a critical understanding of select perspectives on globalization and the associated implications for: (a) formal, non-formal and informal education in local, national, and international contexts; and (b) pedagogical possibilities for critical global education in schools and communities addressing global issues pertaining to international development (poverty and inequality in North-South trajectories), ecology, human rights and improved prospects for peace.
EDPS 526 Race, Racialization and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course examines the concept of race and its manifestations in society and the education system. We engage with the idea of race as philosophy, race as theorized by sociologists and race as a historical discourse. Further, the course highlights how such modes of analyses and conceptual frames are theorized, utilized and legitimized. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 501 “Race, Racialization and Education” and EDPS 526.
EDPS 527 Youth, Culture and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores the relationship between youth, culture and education particularly with reference to formal schooling. Students will be introduced to various critical cultural studies theories and sociological perspectives in order to understand how youth draw on cultural formations to relate to, resist, or accommodate schooling in contemporary western societies. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 501 “Youth, Culture and Education” and EDPS 527.
EDPS 528 Global Transformations, Indigenous Knowledge and the Crisis of Sustainability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the intersection of Indigenous peoples, Indigenous traditional and contemporary knowledge and global transformations in the early 21st century. Central to the course are changes to the conceptualization of education and knowledge and the contested nature and role of Indigenous knowledge and politics. In this context the course has particular regard to what has been designated as the ‘triple crisis of sustainability’. This course is open to all graduate students. Credit cannot be received for both EDPS 636 and EDPS 528.
EDPS 530 History of Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of studies in the history of formal informal educational institutions and their relationship with Canadian society in a global context. Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 530 and EDPS 530.
EDPS 531 Supervision of Educational Personnel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 521 and EDPS 531. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 532 Selected Topics in Educational Supervision Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 522 and EDPS 532.
EDPS 535 Indigenous Research Methodologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines various approaches, definitions, principles and practices that have been used to frame a discussion of Indigenous research methodologies. The course will provide opportunities for new insight, knowledge, and understanding about indigenous research paradigms and/or research methods, and to consider the relationship and impact of these on Indigenous peoples and communities. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 601 “Indigenous Research Methodologies” and EDPS 535.
EDPS 537 Issues in Indigenous Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course explores contemporary issues in Indigenous education as they are experienced within Indigenous communities in North America and elsewhere. The course prepares students for working in these communities as researchers and/or as practitioners. The course outcomes will inform further research, practice and training in Indigenous education. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 601 “Issues in First Nations Education” and EDPS 537.
EDPS 538 From Oral Language to Written Text Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course examines orality and literacy as contested concepts that historically and in the present continue to impact perceptions of Indigenous/Aboriginal thought and Indigenous/Aboriginal ways of being by scholars and educators. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 601 “From Oral Language to Written Text” and EDPS 538.
EDPS 539 Revitalizing Indigenous Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course studies the impact of the loss of Indigenous languages and strategies, policies and practices aimed at the revival and maintenance of Indigenous languages locally and internationally. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 601 “From Oral Language to Written Text” and EDPS 538.
EDPS 541 Organizational Learning and Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces various theoretical and conceptual orientations to organizational learning and organizational change, and involves students in practical projects exploring learning and change in organizational contexts such as workplaces, communities, schools, and post-secondary institutions.
EDPS 544 Critical and Feminist Pedagogical Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines historical and contemporary perspectives shaping critical and feminist pedagogies, both of which support inclusive and holistic teaching and research practices. Explores how these perspectives can inform research designs and methods for studying policy development, program design, and professional practice. Intent is to have students conduct analysis in relation to their own educational projects and professional interests.
EDPS 545 Learning and the Workplace Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on critical analysis of trends, policies and issues related to informal and formal learning of adults in, for, and through the workplace.
EDPS 547 Leadership and Social Justice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores theoretical frameworks of social justice and practical experiences of social justice issues in schools, higher education institutions, and their communities. Students will critically examine concepts of social justice, exclusion, and inclusive education from the perspective of the educational leader as part of a wider educational community.
EDPS 548 Global Governance and Issues in Educational Administration and Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course offers a critical comparative analysis of issues related to the organization and leadership of educational institutions and organizations viewed within a global context. A key focus of the course is on governance and the structures and roles of multilateral and transnational economic, political, social, and environmental organizations, institutions and systems in establishing discursive parameters for educational policy and practice. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 501 Global Perspectives and Issues in Educational Administration and Leadership and EDPS 548.
EDPS 551 Governance and Administration of Education in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 551 and EDPS 551. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 553 Legal Aspects of Educational Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 553 and EDPS 553. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 554 The Philosophy of Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides opportunity to explore philosophical issues that arise both in the conduct of educational research and in its application to practice.
EDPS 558 Teaching Seminar I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). This 20 hour practicum will provide students enrolled in the Post Baccalaureate Certificate in Teaching and Learning in Higher Education with opportunities to apply and reflect on the content provided in EDPS 560. Students must also be enrolled in, or have already received credit for, EDPS 560. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDPS 559 Teaching Seminar II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). This 20 hour practicum will provide students enrolled in the Post Baccalaureate Certificate in Teaching and Learning in Higher Education with opportunities to apply and reflect on the content provided in EDPS 561. Students must also be enrolled in, or have already received credit for, EDPS 561. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDPS 560 Philosophies, Theories and Methods of Teaching and Learning in Adult and Higher Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the theoretical, conceptual, philosophical and practical aspects of teaching and learning in adult and higher education, private or public institutions and community organizations. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDPS 561 Design and Development of Learning, Teaching and Assessment in Adult and Higher Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the theory, methods and practice of instructional design in adult and higher education, private or public institutions, and community organizations. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EDPS 562 Social Theory and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 562 and EDPS 562.
EDPS 563 Education from a Sociological Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 560 and EDPS 563.
EDPS 564 Education and Social Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 564 and EDPS 564.
EDPS 567 Education and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The organization and processes of community education at the local, provincial and national levels of social interaction as seen from the theory and research of contemporary sociology. Students may not receive credit for both EDFN 561 and EDPS 567.
EDPS 571 The Organization of Postsecondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 571 and EDPS 571.
EDPS 572 Administration of Postsecondary Institutions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EDAL 571 or EDPS 571 or consent of Department. Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 572 and EDPS 572.
EDPS 575 Indigenous Knowledge and Anti-Racist Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will examine the relationship between anti-racism (practice and theory) and indigenous knowledge in the context of Indigenous survival and beyond. The course will engage with various perspectives, knowledge and strategies in realizing anti-racism.
EDPS 577 Foundations of Adult and Higher Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This survey course examines the various interpretations and paradigms of adult and higher education. Ways of studying adult and higher education are presented using concepts, analysis, theories, and methodologies from the various foundational disciplines. Students may not receive credit for both EDAE 577 and EDPS 577.
EDPS 578 Learning in Social Movements Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course deals with historical and contemporary theories and practices of adult education as it is practiced in social movements and social action, both locally and internationally. The study of the pedagogical dimension includes experiential, transformative, social and political learning and teaching in diverse social movements. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 501 “The Community Practice of Adult Education” and EDPS 578.
EDPS 580 Contemporary Issues in Education: Perspectives on Policy and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to foundational approaches to contemporary issues in Canadian and international education contexts. Introduces multidimensional approaches associated with the history, sociology, and philosophy of education to help students understand and critically assess educational policy and practice. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 581 Introduction to Evaluating Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to a critical interpretation and evaluation of research in the specializations within the Department of Educational Policy Studies, using a wide range of orientations and approaches. Students may not receive credit for both EDPS 508 and EDPS 581. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 585 Needs Assessment and Program Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAE 585 and EDPS 585.
EDPS 590 Foundations of Education: Perspectives on Canadian Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on a critical examination of Canadian educational issues from philosophical, historical, sociological and cultural perspectives. Themes may include multiculturalism, educational reform and governance, the global economy and new technologies, changing nature of educational goals, and transformations in teaching.
EDPS 591 Foundations of Education: Perspectives on International Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critically examines the role of education in the problems and prospects of international development. As an inclusive construct, development comprises enhancements in the economic, social, political, cultural and technological well-being of people’s lives. Examines contemporary societal issues that influence and/or are influenced by educational policies and programs. Perspectives from regions and groups such as Africa, Asia, Latin America, Europe, the Oceania-Pacific, the Caribbean, the Middle East, and communities indigenous to different parts of the world will be included.
EDPS 594 Group Processes in Educational Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 594 and EDPS 594.
EDPS 595 The School Principalship: Seminars and Simulations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Applied activities and academic studies which enable the student to learn skills and knowledge pertinent to the responsibilities of the principal, by disciplined reflection on their performance in simulated administrative situations. Prerequisites: EDAL 501 and 502 or EDPS 511 and 512 or consent of Department. Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 595 and EDPS 595. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPS 606 Supervised Individual Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
EDPS 635 Organization Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 635 and EDPS 635.
EDPS 655 Politics of Education I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 655 and EDPS 655.
EDPS 671 Issues in Administration of Postsecondary Education I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 671 and EDPS 671.
EDPS 672 Issues in Postsecondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the challenges and opportunities posed by the complex environments in which postsecondary institutions operate. Various theoretical lenses will be used to study such aspects of colleges and universities as the institutional mission, values and societal/cultural role, teaching and research, accessibility, lifelong learning, equity and diversity, changing faculty and student roles, and curriculum. Students may not receive credit for both EDAL 672 and EDPS 672.
EDPS 680 Policy Research and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on a critical and disciplined examination of education and policy issues by drawing on a variety of theoretical orientations. Identifies the centrality of policy research within different educational contexts: adult education, K-12, post-secondary, and aboriginal schooling in Canada and internationally. Students will explore a multiplicity of ways to combine the study of policy with the study of practice, politics, culture and power.
EDPS 681 Research Frameworks and Qualitative Methodologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores the philosophical/epistemological underpinnings of selected research frameworks as well as relevant qualitative methodologies within the specializations of the Department of Educational Policy Studies. Students may receive credit for only one of EDAL 611, EDPS 611 and EDPS 681.
EDPS 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
Education - Psychology
EDPY
Department of Educational Psychology Faculty of Education
Note: The course prefix for Education (Psychology) courses has changed from EDPSY to EDPY.
Undergraduate Courses
EDPY 301 Introduction to Inclusive Education: Adapting Classroom Instruction for Students with Special Needs =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). This course provides an introduction to teaching students with diverse learning support needs within the inclusive education context. Course content focuses on adapting classroom instruction and classroom environments to enhance learning for all students. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 302 Learning and Development in Childhood Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). This course will include theoretical and practical aspects of physical, cognitive, social and emotional development and learning during the period from infancy to middle childhood (0-12 years). Prerequisite EDU 100 or pre/corequisite EDU 300 (After Degree students). Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 302 and EDPY 402. This course may not be taken for credit if credit for PSYCO 323 is already awarded. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 303 Educational Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce students to the complexity of classroom assessment as a means of supporting and measuring student learning. The intent of this course is to develop an understanding of important concepts and issues in the evaluation of a learner’s knowledge and skills, and to develop competence in constructing instruments and processes to evaluate learner performance. Prerequisite or corequisite: EDFX 325 or 350. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 304 Adolescent Development and Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). This course will include theories of development and learning, sociocultural influences on development and learning, and contexts of identity and health of adolescents. Prerequisite EDU 100 or pre/corequisite EDU 300 (After Degree students). Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 304 and EDPY 404. This course may not be taken for credit if credit for PSYCO 327 is already awarded. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 397 Educational Psychology Seminars =OPEN Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPY 401 Assessment and Instruction of Students with Special Education Needs =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). This course focuses on assessment, individualized program planning, and adapting instruction for students with special needs in the inclusive education context. Emphasis is placed on evidence-based instructional approaches for adapting instruction, and the importance of collaboration and consultation among stakeholders in meeting the needs of students who require special education services and supports. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 401 and EDPY 497 Assessment and Instruction of Exceptional Learners. Prerequisite: EDPY 301.
EDPY 413 Principles and Practice in Teaching ESL Learners =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic strategies for adapting instruction to accommodate ESL learners in their classes. Second language literacy, content- based instruction, and assessment will be covered. Not open to EDPY TESL Diploma or Master’s students.
EDPY 416 Introduction to the Teaching of English as a Second Language =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on principles of language learning, language learners, and learning contexts. Pre-/corequisite: LING 101.
EDPY 417 Grammar of English for Teachers of Adult ESL =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to develop students’ explicit knowledge of English grammar, which provides the conceptual basis for grammar instruction. Emphasis will be placed on developing students’ ability to provide explanations of the most important grammar rules for adult ESL and to design grammar focused activities. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent.
EDPY 418 Methodology in the Teaching of English as a Second Language to Adults =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will learn how to respond to adult ESL students’ learning needs using current ESL teaching principles and techniques, design lesson plans, evaluate resources, and assess learner progress. Prerequisites: EDPY 416.
EDPY 419 TESL Supervised Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This practicum is designed to provide EDPY TESL Diploma students with an opportunity to observe and teach in an established ESL program for adults. Restricted to EDPY TESL Diploma students. Other students require consent of the Department.
EDPY 442 Introduction to Counselling =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). Provides an overview of the field of Counselling Psychology, including its theoretical foundations, applications, and counselling skills. Prerequisite: EDPY 302 or 304, or equivalent.
EDPY 446 Hope and the Helping Relationship =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the theory, research, and practice of hope within classroom, counselling, and related professional settings. Addresses the impact of hope in individual, relational, and institutional contexts and explores current research in the area of hope enhancement.
EDPY 454 Teaching Students with Challenging Behaviours =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on understanding and managing the challenging behaviours of children and adolescents with emotional and behavioural problems in schools. Note: Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 454 and EDPSY 307 or EDPSY 357. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 458 Assessment and Programming for Children with a Specific Reading Disability =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intent is to (a) provide students with a theoretical understanding of specific reading disabilities, (b) introduce students to widely used assessment tools and the interpretation of assessment results, and (c) develop competence in designing and implementing successful instructional programs for students with specific reading disabilities.
EDPY 465 Mentoring Children and Adolescents Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an introduction to and experience with mentoring children and adolescents. Students will attend presentations on topics related to mentoring and mentor children in a group or 1:1 capacity. Open to all students. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 465 and EDPY 397/497 Mentoring Children and Adolescents.
EDPY 470 Deaf Education: An Introduction and Survey =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a general understanding of the development and education of deaf and hard of hearing children highlighting the impact that deafness has upon both the process and products of language development. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 470 and EDPSY 449.
EDPY 472 Introduction to Language Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an overview to the study of child language development and an introduction to educational considerations in teaching students with language or communication disorders. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 472 and EDPSY 450.
EDPY 474 Introduction to American Sign Language =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-1). This is a practical course to develop basic skills in American Sign Language. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 474 and EDPSY 451. Not to be taken by students with credit in ASL 111.
EDPY 497 Senior Seminars =OPEN Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Content varies from year to year. Topics announced prior to registration period. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPY 499 Directed Individual Study in Educational Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
Note: Graduate students in MEd and PhD programs in the Department of Educational Psychology may register in 500 and 600 level courses open to web registration. Others require consent of the Department.
EDPY 500 Introduction to Data Analysis in Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 501 Introduction to Methods of Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Priority given to graduate students in the Department of Educational Psychology.
EDPY 503 Qualitative Methods of Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the theoretical perspectives, principles, processes, and methods of qualitative research. Prerequisite: EDPY 501 or equivalent.
EDPY 505 Quantitative Methods I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course will focus on the analysis of data from experiments and surveys using the analysis of variance. Students will develop knowledge of and skills in understanding the underlying statistical models, matching statistical models to research designs, using computer software to conduct appropriate statistical analyses, and interpreting and reporting findings. Prerequisites: EDPY 500 or equivalent.
EDPY 507 Measurement Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce students to the concepts and procedures required to develop, administer, and use educational and psychological assessments. Emphasis will be placed on the foundational concepts related to reliability and validity. Prerequisites: EDPY 500 or equivalent.
EDPY 510 Learning, Cognition and Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with aspects of human learning, cognition, and the practical application of these theories and methods within education.
EDPY 517 Child/Adolescent Development: Theories and Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis is on understanding child and adolescent development from the combined perspectives of research, theory and practical experience. Stages through to emerging adulthood will be studied. Intended for both masters and doctoral level students. Practitioners or theoreticians from related disciplines are welcome.
EDPY 518 Individual Psychological Assessment: Psycho-Educational Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory, principles, and practice of psychological assessment. Students will gain clinical experience in working with individuals referred for psychological assessment. Prerequisites: EDPY 507 or equivalent and EDPY 521 or equivalent. Registration is restricted to School and Clinical Child Psychology and Counselling Psychology students. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 518 and EDPY 545. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar
EDPY 519 Individual Psychological Assessment: School and Clinical Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory, principles, and practice of psychological assessment with an emphasis on school and clinical applications. Students will gain school and clinical experience in working with individuals referred for psychological assessment. Prerequisite: EDPY 518. Registration is restricted to School and Clinical Child Psychology and Counselling Psychology students. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 519 and EDPY 545. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar
EDPY 521 Foundations of Psychological Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course deals with psychological and psycho- educational assessment and covers the basic principles and skills needed to administer and interpret standardized measures of cognitive abilities and academic achievement. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDPY 523 The Practice of School and Clinical Child Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course is intended to introduce students to the specialization of school and clinical child psychology. Topics discussed in this course include the history of school and clinical child psychology, exploration of professional identity, examination of foundational and functional competencies of practice and research, consideration of unique ethical issues in child psychology, and implementation of an evidence based practice approach. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology program.
EDPY 524 The Psychology of Technology-based Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Using psychological theory as a framework, in this course, students explore the effects of technology on the cognitive processing, emotional responses and social interactions of learners across different types of technology, different ages of learners and different learning contexts. The course begins with an overview of key psychological theories then examines each type of technology from a psychological standpoint. This course focuses on the psychological impact of technology on learners, rather than how to use, design or produce educational technology.
EDPY 527 School and Clinical Based Intervention Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course provides an introduction to academic, behavioural, social, emotional, and counselling intervention with a particular focus on their application to school and clinical settings for use with children and adolescents. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs. Prerequisites: EDPY 507 and EDPY 536 or equivalents.
EDPY 528 Foundations of Child and Adolescent Intervention Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The course takes a developmental psychological approach to understanding psychological practice and interventions with children and adolescents. Prerequisite: EDPY 527 or equivalent.
EDPY 531 Developing an Effective School Counselling Program Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses methods of needs evaluation, counselling program design, and program evaluation within school counselling settings. Includes key issues such as parent conferences, counsellor roles, and professional consultations. Priority given to students in School Counselling program.
EDPY 532 Systems of Counselling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces the major theories used in counselling/psychotherapy. Priority given to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs or consent of Department.
EDPY 533 Basic Skills, Issues and Attitudes in Counselling I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-4). This practicum course focuses on the development of foundational skills, knowledge and attitudes necessary for the professional practice of counselling. Restricted to students enrolled in the Counselling Psychology program.
EDPY 534 Basic Skills, Issues and Attitudes in Counselling II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-3s-4). Restricted to students enrolled in the Counselling Psychology program. Prerequisite: EDPY 533.
EDPY 536 Ethical and Professional Issues in Psychological Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1.5s-0). This course is designed to increase knowledge of ethical, legal, and professional standards of psychological practice. Priority given to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs or consent of Department.
EDPY 538 Theory and Practice in Group Counselling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This course is designed to develop an understanding of group theory and process and to acquire skills needed in leading a counselling group. Prerequisites or corequisites: EDPY 533 and 534 or consent of Department.
EDPY 540 Counselling Psychology: Field Placement Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-3). Field placement with a community-based counselling practicum as well as a seminar that focuses on professional and clinical issues related to the practicum experience. Prerequisite: EDPY 532, 533, 534, 536 and consent of Department. Restricted to course-based MEd Counselling Psychology students.
EDPY 542 Cross-Cultural Counselling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to establish a theoretical and practical understanding of the factors that influence the nature and effectiveness of the cross-cultural counselling process. Includes multicultural counselling competencies, ethics in cross-cultural counselling interactions, models of racial and cultural identity development, multicultural assessment procedures, and culture-specific (emic) and universal (etic) helping styles. Priority given to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology, Counselling Psychology or Teaching English as a Second Language programs or consent of Department.
EDPY 543 Mental Health Testing in Counselling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory, research, and practice regarding mental health testing of adolescent and adult clients. Students will gain practical and technical assessment and testing experience, across a wide range of mental health tests, including personality, career, and general screening measures. Restricted to Counselling Psychology and School and Clinical Child Psychology students. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar
EDPY 544 Principles of Psychological Testing and Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPY 546 Hope and the Helping Relationship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the theory, research, and practice of hope within classroom, counselling, and related professional settings. Addresses the impact of hope in individual, relational, and institutional contexts and explores current research in the area of hope enhancement.
EDPY 547 Therapeutic Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory, research, and practice regarding therapeutic assessment. Students will gain practical and technical assessment, consultation, and testing experience with adolescent and adult clients, particularly regarding collaborative approaches that act as therapeutic interventions in and of themselves. Prerequisites: EDPY 518 or EDPY 543. Restricted to Counselling Psychology and School and Clinical Child Psychology students. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar
EDPY 550 School Counselling Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-3). Practicum course consists of a supervised school counselling field placement as well as a clinic-based instructional seminar that focuses on professional and clinical issues related to the practicum experience. Restricted to students enrolled in the School Counselling program.
EDPY 552 Autism: Assessment and Intervention Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an overview of learning and perceptual processes and current empirically based assessment and intervention supports relevant to autism.
EDPY 555 Advanced Assessment and Intervention for Reading Disabilities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides students with an understanding of reading disabilities, introduces them to relevant assessment tools, and examines how to design and implement successful interventions for students with reading disabilities.
EDPY 556 Issues and Trends in Special Education: Prevalence of Exceptionalities and Professional Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Aspects of theory, research and professional practice within the field of special education will be examined in this class. All special needs and developmental disorders are considered, particularly in the realm of theory/practice relationships. Such issues as program evaluation, integration, personnel preparation, and the identification of special needs will be considered. Validity of current practices and beliefs will be addressed through reviews of research, theory, and legislation/policy and the relationship between these areas and professional practice.
EDPY 560 Seminar on Research in Special Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Contemporary research and applications regarding children exhibiting exceptionalities are reviewed from the perspectives of current research paradigms and methods. Students apply these qualitative and quantitative models of exploration and knowledge development in terms of better informed practice and more adequate theory development. Pre/corequisite: EDPY 501 or equivalent.
EDPY 563 Assistive Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide educators and/or educational consultants with an introduction to assistive technology focusing on making effective planning and decisions about the use of assistive technology in the classroom and other educational settings.
EDPY 573 Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Acquaints students with a wide variety of CALL opportunities available for the English as a Second Language (ESL) classroom, presents guidelines for evaluating CALL resources, and provides a framework for the effective integration of CALL into ESL curricula. Basic familiarity with the computer and the Internet is required. Prerequisite: EDPY 418 or consent of the Department.
EDPY 575 Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL) Supervised Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). This practicum is designed to provide EDPY TESL Master’s students with an opportunity to observe and teach in an established ESL program for adults. Restricted to EDPY TESL Master’s students.
EDPY 578 Teaching English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an overview of the theory and practice of teaching English for Academic Purposes to advanced proficiency English as a second language students.
EDPY 581 Psychological Aspects of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of bilingualism. Deals with the following questions: What is bilingualism? How do we measure bilingualism? How does a person become bilingual? What are the consequences of individual and societal bilingualism? Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent.
EDPY 585 Teaching and Learning Grammar in Second Language Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how grammar teaching can be contextualized according to the principles of communicative language teaching. Theories concerning the relationship between adult learners’ implicit and explicit knowledge of grammar will be reviewed, and different approaches to grammar instruction will be explored. Prerequisites: EDPY 416, EDPY 417, and EDPY 418 or equivalents, or consent of Department.
EDPY 588 Teaching English as an International Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues relating to the teaching of English as a global language are explored. A general approach to analyzing the teaching of English for international communication in different settings is developed. Topics may include: functions of language; diglossia; World Englishes; language endangerment; language planning; communicative language teaching in non-Western settings; content-based instruction; washback in language testing. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent.
EDPY 590 Classroom Research Issues in Second Language Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to applied linguistics research in second or foreign language classrooms. Topics typically include: methods of classroom research; teacher-student interaction; the effect of feedback on learner errors; form- focused instruction; strategy training. Prerequisite: EDPY 418 or equivalent.
EDPY 591 Teaching Literacy and Reading to ESL Learners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice in the instruction of literacy and reading to ESL students. Prerequisite: EDPY 416.
EDPY 593 ESL Assessment and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to assessment practices and procedures in ESL/EFL. Prerequisite: LING 101.
EDPY 594 Teaching Pronunciation to ESL Learners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to relevant research and specific classroom teaching strategies. Prerequisite: EDPY 416.
EDPY 595 Settlement Adjustment Issues for ESL Immigrants to Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on political, curricular, social, cultural, and linguistic factors that have an impact on immigrants to Canada.
EDPY 597 Special Seminars Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Content varies from year to year. Topics announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript carries title descriptive of content. May be repeated.
EDPY 599 Individual Directed Reading and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPY 601 Advanced Doctoral Research Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to provide doctoral students with a forum to gain skills and discuss topics related to conducting theoretical and applied research relevant to the practice of psychology. Prerequisite: EDPY 501, EDPY 505 or EDPY 503.
EDPY 604 Mixed Methods Approaches to Educational Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to mixed methods research as a means of conducting educational research. Within each of the major mixed methods designs, the research problems addressed, data collection and analysis strategies, and reporting venues are discussed. Prerequisites: EDPY 501 or equivalent. Additional methods courses in quantitative and qualitative research are recommended.
EDPY 605 Quantitative Methods II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This course will introduce students to advanced statistical techniques that are frequently used in data analysis in the social sciences. Selected topics such as multiple regression, MANOVA, canonical correlation, principal component analysis, and factor analysis will be covered. Prerequisite: EDPY 505 or equivalent.
EDPY 607 Measurement Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on advanced topics and applications required to develop, administer, and use educational and psychological assessments. Emphasis will be placed on the application of theoretical concepts necessary for solving practical assessment problems. Prerequisite: EDPY 507 or equivalent. Formerly EDPY 508. Students cannot receive credit for both EDPY 508 and EDPY 607.
EDPY 610 Selected Topics in Learning, Cognition and Instruction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EDPY 510 or equivalent.
EDPY 612 Research Practicum in Psychological Studies in Education Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-3s-8). This doctoral level practicum is designed to provide students with the opportunity to acquire community-research experience. There are two components to the course: (a) the community research placement, and (b) the professional development seminars. The professional development seminars are designed to address a number of topics in this area, as well as expose students to a number of current professional issues facing educational psychologists working in the research community. Prerequisites: completed first year of doctoral studies. Consent of department.
EDPY 614 Social and Emotional Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines current theoretical, methodological, and applied issues in social and emotional behavioural development. Discussion of atypical development will also be incorporated.
EDPY 615 Program Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce students to the theoretical ideas and practical applications of program evaluation. Prerequisites: EDPY 501 or equivalent.
EDPY 616 Achievement Motivation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a general overview of human motivation from a psychological perspective. Students may not receive credit for both EDPY 616 and EDPY 597/697 topic of Academic Motivation.
EDPY 630 Counselling Psychology Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). Students in the Doctoral Counselling Program must successfully complete a 1,600 hour internship accredited by the Canadian Psychological Association (or equivalent). Students must complete pre-session study seminars related to the internship application process, interviewing skills, and ranking of internship sites/decision making. Students are expected to participate in the Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC) matching process. Prerequisites: Consent of Department, completion of required coursework and completion of doctoral candidacy exam.
EDPY 632 History and Systems of Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides a historical examination of the philosophical and scientific development of the discipline of psychology. Priority given to PhD students enrolled in the Counselling Psychology program.
EDPY 633 Advanced Counselling Practicum I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-3). This doctoral level practicum is designed to provide students with an opportunity to develop an approach to counselling that is congruent with professional, social and scientific standards, is sufficiently flexible to address the range of human variability, and is facilitative of client change. Prerequisite: EDPY 533 and 534 or equivalent.
EDPY 634 Advanced Counselling Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-3). This doctoral level Practicum is a continuation of EDPY 633, prerequisite: EDPY 633.
EDPY 635 Counselling Speciality: Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-3). Prerequisite: EDPY 633 or equivalent.
EDPY 640 Developmental Psychopathology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide students with the theoretical and empirical preparation necessary for advanced clinical training in the diagnosis of mental disorders and psychopathology. This course will emphasize methods of conceptualizing the diagnostic process, with particular focus on developmental psychopathology, differential diagnosis, and assessment that is closely linked to intervention. Students will develop familiarity with the clinical presentation and diagnostic criteria of major mental disorders as they are commonly encountered in practice, primarily as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as well as coverage of alternate diagnostic systems such as the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Diseases. The course will explore both strengths and weaknesses of the medical model of pathology as it applies to educational and psychological problems, leaving students to formulate and establish their approach regarding its utility in clinical practice. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs.
EDPY 641 Child and Adolescent Advanced Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on the process of psychological assessment and clinical tools used for identification of mental health and cognitive functioning in both children and adolescents. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology or Counselling Psychology programs. Prerequisites: EDPY 518 or EDPY 519 or equivalent and EDPY 640 or equivalent.
EDPY 642 Neuropsychological Basis of Learning and Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An overview of the neurobiological aspects of development: implications for biological, social, and cognitive functioning through childhood and adolescence. Prerequisite: EDPY 519 or equivalent.
EDPY 643 Child/Adolescent Therapy and Intervention Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course is intended to provide students with exposure to various modes of intervention with children and adolescents. Prerequisite: EDPY 641. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology and Counselling Psychology programs.
EDPY 644 Consultation in School and Clinical Child Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A clinical course intended to explore the role of the psychologist as consultant and collaborator. Topics discussed in this course include models/theories, related skill development, evaluation/techniques, and issues and trends related to collaboration. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology and Counselling Psychology programs.
EDPY 645 SCCP School Practicum Placement Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 350 hours). School setting practicum in School and Clinical Child Psychology. This doctoral level practicum is designed to provide students with practical, supervised experiences in both assessment and intervention in school settings. Pre/corequisite: EDPY 641. Restricted to PhD students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology program.
EDPY 647 SCCP Clinical Practicum Placement Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 350 hours). Clinical setting practicum in School and Clinical Child Psychology. This supervised doctoral level practicum is designed to provide students with advanced assessment and intervention experience with children and adolescents in hospital clinics, children’s mental health centres or clinical child and adolescent community settings. Pre/corequisite: EDPY 643. Prerequisites: EDPY 641 and EDPY 645. Restricted to PhD students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology program.
EDPY 650 School and Clinical Child Psychology Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). A supervised training program designed to provide students in the doctoral program in School and Clinical Child Psychology with a planned, programmed sequence of training experience. Students must successfully complete an approved 1,600 hour internship. Restricted to students enrolled in the School and Clinical Child Psychology doctoral program. Prerequisites: Consent of Department, successful completion of coursework and candidacy exam.
EDPY 680 Seminar in Teaching English as a Second Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar will give doctoral students the opportunity to become acquainted with research and theory in educational linguistics.
EDPY 697 Special Seminars Œ1-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Content varies from year to year. Topics announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript carries title descriptive of content. May be repeated.
EDPY 699 Individual Directed Reading and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDPY 900 Research/Capping Project Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, unassigned).
EDPY 903 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable).
#
Education - Secondary
EDSE
Department of Secondary Education Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
EDSE 305 Curriculum and Teaching in Secondary Schools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to help educators learn about themselves as a secondary school teacher, planning for teaching in a secondary school, ideas and policies that impact the planning for teaching in a secondary school; and their role in contributing to the teaching profession. Pre/corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, 210, 211. Note: EDSE 305 is not open to first year students.
EDSE 307 Language, Literacy and Society in Educational Contexts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. EDSE 307 is designed to prepare teachers to develop English language and literacy abilities in learners in grades 7 through 12, particularly diverse and minority learners. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 312 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Art Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 313 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Art Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 313 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Art.
EDSE 317 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Career and Technology Studies Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 318 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Career and Technology Studies Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 318 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Career and Technology Studies.
EDSE 322 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Drama Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 323 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Drama Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area to include DRAMA 102 or 103, DRAMA 149 or 150, and DRAMA 240 or 247; pre/corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 323 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Drama.
EDSE 327 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School English Language Arts Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 328 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School English Language Arts Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 328 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is English Language Arts.
EDSE 333 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Health Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 333 is not open to first year students.
EDSE 337 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Mathematics Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 338 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Mathematics Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisite: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 338 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Mathematics.
EDSE 343 Curriculum and Teaching Music in the Secondary School: Wind Band I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *9 in the Major subject area to include MUSIC 213, 214 and 315. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350.
EDSE 344 Curriculum and Teaching Music in the Secondary School: Wind Band Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the minor to include MUSIC 213, 214, and 215; pre/corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 344 is not open to first year students.
EDSE 347 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Physical Education Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 348 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Physical Education Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 348 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Physical Education.
EDSE 355 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Science Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students. Students may only receive credit for one of EDSE 352, EDSE 355, EDSE 360, or EDSE 364.
EDSE 356 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Science Minor Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 356 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Biological Sciences, Chemistry, General Sciences, Physical Sciences or Physics. Students may only receive credit for one of EDSE 353, EDSE 356, EDSE 361, or EDSE 366.
EDSE 368 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Second Language Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 369 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School ESL Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 369 is not open to first year students.
EDSE 370 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Second Language Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 370 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is also a Second Language.
EDSE 373 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Social Studies Majors I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Introductory Professional Term (IPT) for the Secondary Education Route. Successful completion of the on-campus portion of the IPT is expected prior to being granted permission to continue into EDFX 350. Note: Not open to first year students.
EDSE 374 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Social Studies Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 374 is not open to first year students or students whose Major is Social Studies.
EDSE 378 Curriculum and Teaching for Religious and Moral Education Minors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *9 in the Minor subject area; pre/ corequisites: EDU 100 or 300, EDU 210, and EDU 211. Note: EDSE 378 is not open to first year students.
EDSE 401 Conference Seminar Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 402 Guided Individual Study in Secondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). May be offered over two terms. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and Department.
EDSE 412 Curriculum and Teaching in Secondary School Art Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major Subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 417 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Career and Technology Studies Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 422 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Drama Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the required Drama courses as specified in Education section of the Calendar under the heading Components of the Program. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 427 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School English Language Arts Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 430 Teaching Composition, Language and Culture to Adolescents Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This senior undergraduate course offers pedagogical strategies and experiences for teaching writing in the context of New Literacies for students from a range of backgrounds in junior and senior high schools. The course focuses on questions of composition, language and culture and encourages participants to see themselves as writers as well as teachers of writing.
EDSE 437 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Mathematics Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 439 Specialized Methods in Secondary School Mathematics Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores a range of particular methods relevant to the teaching of secondary school mathematics. Prerequisite: Secondary mathematics major and minor students must have completed an EDSE curriculum course or the Introductory Professional Term. All others require consent of the Department.
EDSE 442 The Use of Computers in the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). This course explores the uses of technology in the teaching and learning of secondary school mathematics. Prerequisite: Secondary mathematics majors and minors must have completed an EDSE curriculum course or the Introductory Professional Term. All others require consent of the Department.
EDSE 443 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Music: Wind Band II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional term and *24 in the Major subject area to include Music 213, 214 and 315. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 446 The School Jazz Program Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The School Jazz Program covers the essentials of running a school jazz band as a component of the secondary school instrumental program. Jazz improvisation, repertoire, rehearsal techniques, and jazz instrumental techniques are among the topics covered. Prerequisites: Students should have knowledge of functional harmony as taught in a typical first-year university harmony course.
EDSE 447 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Physical Education Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area to include KIN 294. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 451 Integrating Theory and Classroom Practice in the Advanced Professional Term Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: Courses in the Advanced Professional Term for the Secondary Education Route including EDFX 450. Students may not receive credit for both EDFX 451 and EDSE 451.
EDSE 455 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Science Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450. Students may only receive credit for one of EDSE 452, EDSE 455, EDSE 456, or EDSE 460.
EDSE 468 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Second Language Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 473 Curriculum and Teaching for Secondary School Social Studies Majors II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: Introductory Professional Term and *24 in the Major subject area. Corequisite: EDSE 451. Successful completion is expected prior to being granted permission to commence EDFX 450.
EDSE 495 Curriculum and Teaching in Secondary School Career Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will explore and engage with curriculum and teaching of career-related education and investigate a variety of ways and resources to help their future students think about strategic career planning, and occupational and educational opportunities. Sections may be offered in an alternate delivery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
Graduate Courses
EDSE 501 Conference Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Department. May include alternate delivery sections; may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 502 Advanced Level Guided Individual Study in Secondary Education Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). May be offered over two terms. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and Department.
EDSE 503 Curriculum Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the bases of current curriculum theories and their relationship to current educational practices. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 504 Curriculum Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on curriculum perspectives and possibilities. Prerequisite: EDSE 503. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 505 An Introduction to Curriculum Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended as an introduction to the major discourses and themes that define the field of curriculum studies. It is primarily focused on the Albertan and Canadian contexts. EDSE 505 cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been received for EDSE 405 or EDSE 503.
EDSE 508 Media and Popular Culture in the Curriculum =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar course examining texts and student reception of media (primarily television and film) within the rubric of popular culture for curriculum purposes.
EDSE 509 Pedagogy of Desire =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course examines the sexual politics of the pedagogical relationship and is based on Lacanian psychoanalysis.
EDSE 510 Research Methods in Secondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory research methods and methodology course. The intent is to acquaint students with the many and varied methods of educational research, and the means of conducting research and presenting research findings. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 511 Research Design in Secondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to enable students to conceptualize and design a thesis proposal for their Master’s degree. Prerequisite: EDSE 510 or consent of Department.
EDSE 512 Research Project in Secondary Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intended as a practical course to enable course- based students to conceptualize and design a research project for their Master’s degree. Prerequisite: EDSE 510 or consent of Department. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 529 Curricular Issues in English Language Arts Education =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Through critically considering the relationship of current theory, research, and practice, this course will address a number of issues in the development and implementation of language arts programs at the secondary school level. It will also provide an overview of the key theories and influences which have shaped and are continuing to affect language arts curriculum and instruction.
EDSE 539 Secondary Mathematics Education: Research Issues in the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores a range of research and issues concerned with the teaching and learning of mathematics. Possible topics include: mathematical understanding, communication, spoken and written discourse, and varied classroom practices.
EDSE 540 Secondary Mathematics Education: Examining Tasks, Curricula and Programs =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines mathematical tasks, curricula and programs and explores the relationships among them and their implications for mathematics education policy.
EDSE 546 The School Jazz Program =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The School Jazz Program covers the essentials of running a school jazz band as a component of the secondary school instrumental program. Jazz improvisation, repertoire, rehearsal techniques and jazz instrumental techniques are among the topics covered. Prerequisites: Students should have knowledge of functional harmony as taught in a typical first-year university harmony course.
EDSE 548 Conceptualizing the Field of Physical Education: Historical and Contemporary Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theory and research in the field of physical education.
EDSE 567 Science, Technology, Society and Environment: Implications for Teaching =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Addresses the natures of science and of technology, and their interactions with one another and with social issues. The role of science and technology in modern Western society as examined, and issues of environmental responsibility, bioethics, alternative cultural beliefs about science and society, and the implications of science, technology, society and environment (STSE) for classroom science teaching are explored.
EDSE 569 Issues and Approaches in Second and Foreign Language Literacy Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students will examine issues unique to second and foreign language students as they learn to read. From the beginning reader to the advanced, explorations will draw from upon top-down, bottom-up and interactional views of literacy as well as socio-political factors.
EDSE 573 Research in Social Studies Teaching and Curriculum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of how various historical and contemporary understandings have functioned to make sense of present social worlds, and how these have been expressed in social studies curriculum and teaching.
EDSE 577 Pedagogy of Technology: Teachers and Students as Cyborgs Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A seminar course examining the pedagogical and curricular implications of the technologizing of personal and educational life-worlds.
EDSE 601 Conference Seminar in Secondary Education II Œ1-3 (variable) (variable, variable). Prerequisites: consent of instructor and Department. May include alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
EDSE 602 Advanced Level Guided Individual Study in Secondary Education Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Department.
EDSE 606 Theory and Practice in Action Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: EDSE 503 and 504 or consent of Department.
EDSE 610 Advanced Research Seminar in Secondary Education I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A doctoral-level research seminar that deals with selected topics and addresses all stages of the research process. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
EDSE 611 Phenomenological Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar explores phenomenology as qualitative approach to human and social science research. The meaning of any possible human experience can be a topic for phenomenological inquiry. The course is especially relevant to persons interested in the study of phenomenological meaning in the domains of education, psychology, counselling, the health sciences, and related professional and academic fields.
EDSE 612 Arts Based Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Arts-based research is a new paradigm approach that brings together scholarly inquiry and creative processes within disciplines which value human experience and interaction, recognize personal, emotional, experiential and embodied expressions of knowing and being. Participants examine themes in Arts-based research and use any of the myriad of available art forms to explore how they might use the arts in their research process. Prerequisite: EDSE 510 or consent of Instructor.
EDSE 613 Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Participatory Research (PR) is as an approach to doing community-based research viewed as a means of producing knowledge, as a tool for education, consciousness raising, and mobilization for action. By bringing together action and reflection, theory and practice, and community engagement, PR produces practical and reflective knowledge. Themes related to doing PR and examples of PR projects will be explored. Prerequisite: EDSE 510 or consent of Instructor and Department.
EDSE 620 Advanced Research Seminar in Secondary Education II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A doctoral-level research seminar that deals with selected topics and addresses all stages of the research process. This courses is a continuation of EDSE 610. Prerequisites: EDSE 610 and consent of Department.
EDSE 621 Phenomenological Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: EDSE 611 or consent of Department. This seminar further develops the phenomenological research practices introduced in EDSE 611. The course investigates and develops descriptive, interpretive, vocative, and ethical dimensions of reflective phenomenological writing. Students will undertake a supervised phenomenological research project. Note: This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has been obtained in EDSE 611 prior to September 2016.
EDSE 669 Curriculum and Resource Development in Second Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students will address issues of philosophy, rationale, learner expectations, unit organization, learner needs, and linguistic, strategic and cultural competence in resource analysis and development. As well, evaluation of resources will be included.
EDSE 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned).
#
Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECE
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
ECE 200 Technical Communication in Computer and Electrical Engineering Œ2 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-0). Description of the areas of study in electrical and computer engineering and the related industry in Alberta, including coverage of elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Introduction to technical communications in the electrical engineering discipline. Concepts of effective written and oral technical communication, both individual and team delivered; audience identification, planning and research, drafting prose elements and creating persuasive visual graphics. Case studies based on presentations by invited industrial speakers. Student oral presentations.
ECE 201 Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering Œ0.5 (fi 2) (first term, 1 day). Topics of interest to second year Electrical and Computer Engineering students, with special reference to industries in Alberta, including coverage of elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Offered in a single day near the beginning of the Fall term. Restricted to students registered in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
ECE 202 Electrical Circuits I Œ4.3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-1s-3/2). Circuit element definitions. Circuit laws: Ohm’s, KVL, KCL. Resistive voltage and current dividers. Basic loop and nodal analysis. Dependent sources. Circuit theorems: linearity, superposition, maximum power transfer, Thevenin, Norton. Time domain behavior of inductance and capacitance, energy storage. Sinusoidal signals, complex numbers, phasor and impedance concepts. Magnetically coupled networks. Single phase power and power factor. Prerequisites: MATH 101, 102. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 202, E E 240, ECE 209 or E E 239, unless approved by the Department.
ECE 203 Electrical Circuits II Œ4.3 (fi 8) (second term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-3/2). Nonlinear circuit analysis. Diodes: ideal and simple and models, single phase rectifiers. Ideal and finite gain op-amps. Treatment of RLC circuits in the time domain, frequency domain and s-plane. Two port networks. Prerequisites: ECE 202 or E E 240. Corequisite: ECE 240 or E E 238. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 203 or E E 250.
ECE 209 Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Physical concepts of passive circuit elements, Kirchhoff’s laws and DC circuit equations. Energy concepts, time domain analysis of AC circuits. Impedance, complex numbers and phasor algebra. AC power concepts, resonance, three phase circuits, introduction to machines. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 209, E E 239, ECE 202, or E E 240, unless approved by the Department.
ECE 210 Introduction to Digital Logic Design Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Boolean algebra, truth tables, Karnaugh maps. Switching devices and their symbology with an introduction to NAND and NOR logic. Number systems, codes, minimization procedures, synthesis of combinational networks. Synchronous sequential circuits, flip-flops, counters. Arithmetic circuits. Introduction to computer-aided design and simulation tools for digital design and implementation. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 210, E E 280 or CMPUT 329.
ECE 212 Introduction to Microprocessors Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Microcomputer architecture, assembly language programming, sub-routine handling, memory and input/output system and interrupt concepts. Prerequisite: ECE 210 or E E 280 or CMPUT 329. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 212, E E 380 or CMPUT 229.
ECE 220 Programming for Electrical Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Architecture and basic components of computing systems. Programming environment and program development methodology. Basics of programming: from data structures and functions to communication with external devices. Principles of object-oriented programming. Good programming style. Prerequisite: ENCMP 100.
ECE 240 Continuous Time Signals and Systems Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Introduction to linear systems and signal classification. Delta function and convolution. Fourier series expansion. Fourier transform and its properties. Laplace transform. Analysis of linear time invariant (LTI) systems using the Laplace transform. Prerequisites: ECE 202 or E E 240, MATH 201. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 240 or E E 238.
ECE 302 Electronic Devices Œ4.3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-3/2). PN junction semiconductor basics, charge flow and diode equation. Zener diodes. BJT and MOSFET devices and operating regions. Amplifier basics: biasing, gain, input and output resistance, analysis and design. Large signal effects. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: ECE 203 or E E 250. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 302 or E E 340.
ECE 303 Analog Electronics Œ4.3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-3/2). Differential amplifiers. Frequency response: active device high-frequency behaviour and circuit models; amplifier circuits and design. Feedback: concepts and structure; feedback topologies and amplifiers; open- and closed-loop response. Operational amplifiers: behaviour, circuit analysis and design. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 303 or E E 350.
ECE 304 Digital Electronics Œ4.3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-3/2). MOS digital circuits, logic gates, threshold voltages. MOS logic families: design and simulation. CMOS timing: propagation delay, rise and fall times. Storage elements, memory, I/O and interfacing. Prerequisites: ECE 210 or E E 280 or CMPUT 329, and ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 304 or E E 351.
ECE 311 Computer Organization and Architecture Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of modern computer architecture and design concepts. Benchmarks, instruction set design and encoding. Pipelined and superscalar processors. Techniques for exposing and exploiting instruction-level parallelism. Performance of cache and virtual memory hierarchies. Input/output subsystem design. Prerequisite: ECE 212 or E E 380 or CMPUT 229. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 311, CMPE 382 or CMPUT 429.
ECE 312 Embedded System Design Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Design methodology. Internal and external peripherals: serial communication, timers, D/A converters, interrupt controllers. Embedded system programming: introduction to real time operating systems, basics of real time programming, real-time debugging. Power and memory management. Fault tolerance. Prerequisites: ECE 220, and ECE 212 or E E 380. Corequisite: ECE 340.
ECE 315 Computer Interfacing Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Design and use of digital interfaces, including memory, serial, parallel, synchronous and asynchronous interfaces. Hardware implementations of interrupts, buses, input/output devices and direct memory access. Multitasking software architecture, real-time preemptive multitasking kernel. Data structures and mechanisms for flow control. Computer communications interfaces, interfacing of microcontroller to peripheral devices such as stepper motors. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: ECE 212 or E E 380 or CMPUT 229, and 275 or permission of the Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 401 or ECE 411.
ECE 320 Introduction to Software Engineering Process Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Complexity and change in software development. Project communication, organization, and scheduling. Team dynamics. Modeling with Universal Modeling Language (UML). Software requirements. Elicitation and analysis. Object modeling. Dynamic modeling. System design. Addressing design goals. Object design. Reuse and interfaces. Software implementation. Software testing. Rationale management. Configuration management. Software life cycle. Software process improvement. Corequisite: CMPUT 201. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 300 or ECE 320.
ECE 321 Software Requirements Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 2-0-3). Software quality attributes. Software requirements. Requirements elicitation via interviewing, workshops, prototyping, and use case analysis. Vision document and Software Requirement Specification document standards. Formal software specification methods including operational and descriptive models. Design by contract. Verification and validation of requirements. Prerequisite: CMPUT 275. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 310 or ECE 321.
ECE 322 Software Testing and Maintenance Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). From software requirements specification to software testing. Risk analysis and metrics for software testing. Software testing process, including test planning, design, implementation, execution, and evaluation. Test design via white box and black box approaches; coverage-based testing techniques. Unit, integration, and system testing. Acceptance tests. Software maintenance and regression testing. Prerequisite: CMPUT 275. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 320 or ECE 322.
ECE 325 Object-Oriented Software Design Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Software engineering principles of object-oriented design: basic data structures, classes and objects, creation tactics, inheritance, composition, polymorphism, interfaces, compilation and execution. Programming Objectives. Introduction to advanced data structures, inner classes, and reflection. Exception handling and unit testing. Prerequisite: CMPUT 275.
ECE 330 Introduction to Power Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of power concepts, network equations, three-phase circuits, transformer and its characteristics, per-unit calculation, transmission lines and their basic operational characteristics, introduction to power system operation. Prerequisite: ECE 203 or E E 250. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 330 or E E 330.
ECE 332 Electric Machines Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Principles of electromagnetic force and torque in rotating machinery. Simple AC and DC machines. Induction motor theory. Practical aspects of induction motor use: characteristics, standards, starting, variable speed operation. Synchronous machine theory and characteristics. Fractional HP motor theory. Safety in electrical environments. Prerequisite: ECE 330 or E E 330 or consent of Department. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 332 or E E 332.
ECE 340 Discrete Time Signals and Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Discrete time signals and systems; Sampled signals and sampling theorem, aliasing, A/D converter; Z-transform, stability analysis; Discrete-time Fourier transform; Discrete Fourier transform, leakage, spectral analysis; Digital filter design, filter structure. Prerequisite: ECE 240 or E E 238. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 340 or E E 338.
ECE 341 Analytical Methods in Electrical Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Introduction to analytical solutions of partial differential equations, eigenfunctions and eigenvalue problems, special functions in cylindrical and spherical coordinates, Green’s functions, and transform methods. These concepts provide the necessary mathematical foundation for understanding and analyzing important physical phenomena encountered at the micro and nanoscales. Examples drawn from electromagnetics, quantum mechanics, solidstate physics, photonics, thermal transport, and microelectromechanical systems. Prerequisites: ECE 240 or E E 238, and MATH 309 or 311. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 341 or E E 323.
ECE 342 Probability for Electrical and Computer Engineers Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Deterministic and probabilistic models. Basics of probability theory: random experiments, axioms of probability, conditional probability and independence. Discrete and continuous random variables: cumulative distribution and probability density functions, functions of a random variable, expected values, transform methods. Pairs of random variables: independence, joint cdf and pdf, conditional probability and expectation, functions of a pair of random variables, jointly Gaussian random variables. Sums of random variables: the central limit theorem; basic types of random processes, wide sense stationary processes, autocorrelation and crosscorrelation, power spectrum, white noise. Prerequisite: MATH 209. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 342 or E E 387.
ECE 360 Control Systems I Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Linear system models. Time response and stability. Block diagrams and signal flow graphs. Feedback control system characteristics. Dynamic compensation. Root locus analysis and design. Frequency response analysis and design. Prerequisites: ECE 203 or E E 250, and ECE 240 or E E 238. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 360, ECE 362, E E 357, E E 462 or E E 469.
ECE 362 Fundamentals of Control Systems Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Laplace transforms. Transfer function models of physical systems. First and second order systems. Stability and properties of feedback. PID controllers. Frequency domain analysis and design. Digital control. Case studies. Prerequisites: MATH 201. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 360, ECE 362, E E 357, E E 462 or E E 469.
ECE 370 Engineering Electromagnetics I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Review of vector calculus, electrostatics, and magnetostatics. Electric and magnetic fields in material media, including polarization mechanisms and general boundary conditions. Solutions to static field problems. Maxwell’s equations and waves in free space, dielectrics and conducting media. Reflection and refraction, standing waves. Prerequisites: MATH 102, 209 and PHYS 230. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 370 or E E 315.
ECE 380 Introduction to Communication Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Basics of analog communication: amplitude, angle, and analog pulse modulation; modulators and demodulators; frequency multiplexing. Basics of digital communication: sampling, quantization, pulse code modulation, time division multiplexing, binary signal formats. Prerequisite: ECE 240 or E E 238. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 380 or E E 390.
ECE 401 Power Electronics Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to power electronics. AC-DC conversion. DC-AC conversion. DC-DC conversion. AC-AC conversion. Prerequisite: ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 401 or E E 431.
ECE 402 RF Communication Circuits Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to radio communications systems. Frequency selective circuits and transformers. Parallel resonant circuits including transformers. Double-tuned circuits. Impedance matching. Oscillators. Conditions for oscillation. Amplitude limitation mechanisms. Phase stability. Crystal oscillators. Mixers. Diode-ring mixers. Square-law mixers. BJT mixers. Intermodulation distortion. Modulators and demodulators. Average envelope detectors. FM demodulators. High frequency amplifiers and automatic gain control. Broadband techniques. Neutralization. Phase-lock loops. Phase detectors. Voltage-controlled oscillators. Loop filters. Phase-locked loop applications. Power amplifiers. Prerequisite: ECE 303 or E E 350. Corequisite: ECE 360 or ECE 362 or E E 357 or E E 462. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 402 or E E 451.
ECE 403 Integrated Circuit Design Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) design techniques and their application. Electrical characteristics of MOSFET devices and CMOS circuits. Use of CAD tools for simulation and integrated circuit layout. Modeling delays, advanced digital logic circuit techniques, memory. Prerequisite: ECE 304 or E E 351; corequisite: ECE 410 or CMPE 480. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 403 or E E 453.
ECE 405 Biophysical Measurement and Instrumentation Œ3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the principles of biophysical instrumentation. Various sensors are examined including strain gages, inductive, capacitive, thermal, and piezoelectric sensors. Methods of measuring blood pressure are discussed. Origin of biopotentials; membrane and action potentials. Measurement of bioelectrical signals such as the ECG and EMG. Electrical safety, noise, impedance matching, and analog-to-digital conversion. Applications of electrodes, biochemical sensors, and lasers. Prerequisite: ECE 203 or E E 250 or consent of the Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 405 or EE BE 512.
ECE 406 Special Topics in Computer Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to enable individuals or a small group of students to study topics in their particular field of interest under the supervision of a member of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering or the Department of Computing Science or other appropriate departments.
ECE 407 Special Topics in Computer Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to enable individuals or a small group of students to study topics in their particular field of interest under the supervision of a member of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering or the Department of Computing Science or other appropriate departments.
ECE 408 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-0). Intended to enable individuals or a small group of students to study topics in their particular field of interest under the supervision of a member of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering or other appropriate departments.
ECE 409 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-0). Intended to enable individuals or a small group of students to study topics in their particular field of interest under the supervision of a member of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering or other appropriate departments.
ECE 410 Advanced Digital Logic Design Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Review of classical logic design methods. Introduction to the hardware description language VHDL. Logic simulation principles. Digital system design. Digital system testing and design for testability. Arithmetic circuits. State-of-the-art computer-aided design tools and FPGAs are used to design and implement logic circuits. Corequisite: ECE 304 or E E 351. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 480 or ECE 410.
ECE 412 Fault-Tolerant Computing Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Defects in manufacturing, failure mechanisms, and fault modeling. Reliability and availability theory. Static and dynamic redundancy and repair. Error correcting codes and self-checking systems. Roll-back strategies. Fault-tolerant computers and network architecture. Prerequisite: ECE 342. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 425 or ECE 412.
ECE 413 Computer Aided Design of Nanoscale Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Brief history of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems for integrated circuit design. Structure and major features of a modern CAD system. Standard cells, hard macros and soft macros. Standard cell placement and routing algorithms. The Lin-Kernighan, simulated annealing and genetic optimization algorithms for CAD. Clock tree synthesis. Logic synthesis algorithms. Technology mapping algorithms. High-level synthesis. System-on-a-chip (SoC) technology. Prerequisite: CMPUT 201 or consent of the Department. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 488 or ECE 413.
ECE 420 Parallel and Distributed Programming Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Overview of parallel/distributed computing including concepts and terminology. Principles of programming with shared memory and synchronization methods. Multithread programming with Pthreads and OpenMP. Message passing computing: the Message Passing Interface library. Design and performance of parallel algorithms. Prerequisites: CMPUT 275 and 379.
ECE 421 Exploring Software Development Domains Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 2-0-3). Advanced programming concepts. Programming language as a vehicle for discussion about programming concepts such as productivity, components and re-use, traditional vs. scripting approaches. Object oriented construction, systems programming, concurrent programming, Graphical User Interface (GUI) programming, distributed programming, and dynamic programming. Prerequisites: ECE 322 or CMPE 320, ECE 325, CMPUT 301 and CMPUT 379. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 410 or ECE 421.
ECE 422 Reliable and Secure Systems Design Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Causes and consequences of computer system failure. Structure of fault-tolerant computer systems. Methods for protecting software and data against computer failure. Quantification of system reliability. Introduction to formal methods for safety-critical systems. Computer and computer network security. Prerequisite: CMPUT 301. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 420 or ECE 422.
ECE 430 Power System Analysis Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Transmission line design parameters; power flow computations; Generator control systems, load frequency control; economic operation of power systems; Symmetrical components theory; Symmetrical and unsymmetrical fault analysis. Prerequisite: ECE 330 or E E 330. Corequisite: ECE 332 or E E 332. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 430 or E E 430.
ECE 432 Variable Speed Drives Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to variable speed drives. Frequency, phase and vector control of induction motors. Dynamic models for induction motors. Permanent magnet synchronous and brushless dc motor drives. Prerequisite: ECE 332 or E E 332. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 432 or E E 432.
ECE 433 Power System Stability and Transients Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to power system transient states. Power system voltage stability; PV and QV curve methods. Power system angular stability; transient stability and equal area criterion; steady-state stability and power system stabilizer. Electromagnetic transients in power systems, insulation coordination and equipment protection. Methods of power system design and simulation. Prerequisites: ECE 330 or E E 330, and ECE 332 or E E 332. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 433 or E E 433.
ECE 434 Power System Protection Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Short-circuit and other faults in power systems. Analysis of faulted power systems, symmetrical components theory, components of power system protection, various protection schemes and relays. Power system grounding, concepts of transient overvoltage and ground potential rise. Prerequisite: ECE 330 or E E 330. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 434 or E E 434.
ECE 440 Digital Computer Processing of Images Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Extension of sampling theory and the Fourier transform to two dimensions, pixel operations including gray-level modification, algebraic and geometric transformations. The design of spatial filters for noise reduction, image sharpening and edge enhancement, and some discussion of interpolation techniques. An introduction to the concepts of image restoration from known degradations and the reconstruction of images from parallel and fan projections. Prerequisite: ECE 340 or E E 338 or consent of Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of EE BE 540 or ECE 440.
ECE 442 Introduction to Multimedia Signal Processing Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Human visual/audio perception and multimedia data representations. Multimedia enhancement, histogram equalization, noise removal, and edge detection. Image interpolation, digital zooming and error concealment. Fundamentals of compression, transforms, lossless and lossy compression. Multimedia compression, transform coding, and JPEG/MPEG image compression standards. Multimedia communications over networks. Multimedia security, digital rights management, watermarking, and IP protection. Prerequisite: ECE 340 or E E 338 or consent of Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 442 or E E 442.
ECE 449 Intelligent Systems Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Intelligent systems for automatic control and data analysis. The concepts of vagueness and uncertainty, approximate reasoning, fuzzy rule-based systems and fuzzy control. Strategies for learning and adaptation, supervised and reinforcement learning, self-organization and the selection of neural network architectures. Discussion of the principles of search and optimization, evolution and natural selection and genetic algorithms. Introduction to hybrid intelligence. Applications of intelligent systems for pattern recognition, classification, forecasting, decision support, and control. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 449 or ECE 449.
ECE 450 Nanoscale Phenomena in Electronic Devices Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Semiconductor device physics, device scaling trends, advanced MOSFET fabrication and the associated quantum mechanical framework in nanoscale systems. Semiconductor devices as a system of elemental components. Quantum phenomena in the evaluation of semiconductor devices. Impact of new materials such as high-k gate dielectrics, copper damascene processing and diffusion barriers on device performance. Choice of channel materials and strain condition for ultrascaled logic devices, RF and power electronic devices. Prerequisite: ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 450 or E E 450.
ECE 452 Computation for Nanoengineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to advanced numerical methods such as finite-difference, finite-element and spectral-domain techniques for solving partial differential equations. Simulations of nanoscale systems involving multiphysics or coupled differential equations involving electron and thermal transport phenomena, electrodynamics, MEMS, and process simulation, graphical methods for 3D visualization of simulation data. Examples from applied areas of nanoengineering to demonstrate computational methods for understanding complex physical phenomena and for designing and simulating nanoscale devices and systems. Prerequisites: ECE 341 or MATH 309 or 311. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 452 or E E 445.
ECE 455 Engineering of Nanobiotechnological Systems Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Microfluidic and nanobiotechnological devices. Fabrication techniques for devices: self-assembly, lithographic technologies. Applications of nanobiotechnology in computing, electronics, human health, environment and manufacture. Prerequisites: MATH 201 or PHYS 230. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 455 or E E 455.
ECE 456 Introduction to Nanoelectronics Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental concepts related to current flow in nanoelectronic devices. Energy level diagram and the Fermi function. Single-energy-level model for current flow and associated effects, such as the quantum of conductance, Coulomb blockade, and single electron charging. The Schroedinger equation and quantum mechanics for applications in nanoelectronics. Matrix-equation approach for numerical band structure calculations of transistor channel materials. k-space, Brillouin zones, and density of states. Subbands for quantum wells, wires, dots, and carbon nanotubes. Current flow in nanowires and ballistic nanotransistors, including minimum possible channel resistance, quantum capacitance, and the transistor equivalent circuit under ballistic operation. Prerequisite: ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 456 or E E 456.
ECE 457 Microfabrication and Devices Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-2). Microfabrication processes for CMOS, bipolar, MEMS, and microfluidics devices. Laboratory safety. Deposition processes of oxidation, evaporation and sputtering. Lithography, wet and dry etch, and device characterization. Note: Consent of Department required. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 457 or E E 457.
ECE 458 Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of microelectromechanical (MEMS) systems, applications of MEMS technology to radio frequency, optical and biomedical devices. Basic MEMS building blocks, cantilever and clamped-clamped beams. Actuation mechanisms of mechanical microdevices, thermal and electrostatic. The thin film fabrication process, deposition, lithography, etching and release. MEMS in circuits, switches, capacitors, and resonators. Prerequisites: ECE 370 or E E 315 or PHYS 381, and one of MAT E 201, PHYS 244, MEC E 250. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 458 or E E 458.
ECE 460 Control Systems II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to computer control, sample and hold, discrete-time systems. States and state space models. Linearization of nonlinear state-space models. Solving linear time-invariant state-space equations. Discretization of continuous-time systems. Controllability and observability, and their algebraic tests. Minimal state-space realizations. State feedback and eigenvalue/ pole assignment, deadbeat control. Step tracking control design. State estimation and observer design. Observer based control. Introduction to linear quadratic optimal control. Prerequisites: ECE 360 or E E 357, and ECE 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 460 or E E 460.
ECE 461 Digital Control Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Discrete-time system analysis, discretization methods, zero-order-hold (ZOH) discretization, discrete-time transfer functions and state space models. Frequency response of discrete-time systems, effects of sampling and ZOH in digital control. Controllability and observability of state space models. Digital control design by direct and emulation methods. State feedback and observers via eigenvalue assignment, deadbeat control, digital observer-based state feedback control. Introduction to digital linear quadratic regulator (DLQR). Prerequisites: ECE 340 or E E 338, and ECE 360 or ECE 362 or E E 357 or E E 462. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 461 or E E 461.
ECE 464 Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Intervention Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Basic concepts of computer-integrated intervention. Surgical CAD/CAM, assist and simulation systems. Actuators and imagers. Medical robot design, control and optimization. Surgeon-robot interface technology. Haptic feedback in surgical simulation and teleoperation. Virtual fixtures. Time delay compensation in telesurgery. Cooperative manipulation control. Overview of existing systems for robot-assisted intervention and for virtual-reality surgical simulation. Prerequisite: ECE 360 or ECE 462 or E E 357 or E E 462 or consent of the Department. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 464 or E E 464.
ECE 471 Photonics I Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Electromagnetic wave propagation at optical frequencies and approximations. Thermal and luminescent light sources, optical beams. Ray and Gaussian optics and simple optical components. Wave optics, polarization, interference, interferometric devices. Light-matter interactions. Optics of crystals; polarizers and waveplates. Photodetectors. Photonic engineering applications. Prerequisite: ECE 370 or E E 315, or corequisite PHYS 381. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 471, E E 471 or PHYS 362. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 471 or E E 471.
ECE 472 Photonics II Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Interaction of radiation with atoms, laser oscillations and threshold conditions, 3- and 4-level laser systems, rate equations, special properties of laser light, cavity Q and photon lifetime, optical resonators and lens waveguides, Gaussian beams, gain saturation, Q-switching, mode locking, interaction of light and sound, holography. Description of various lasers: solid, gas, semiconductor, dye, Raman and chemical. Laser applications. Prerequisites: ECE 370 or E E 315 or PHYS 381 or consent of Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 472 or E E 472.
ECE 474 Introduction to Plasma Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Definition of plasma. Behavior in electric and magnetic fields. Particle, kinetic and fluid description of flow and transport phenomena. Waves in plasmas. Current approaches to thermonuclear fusion. High temperature laser produced plasmas and low temperature DC and RF discharge plasmas. Applications in discharge pumping of lasers, plasma etching, thin film deposition and generation of x-rays. Prerequisites: ECE 370 or E E 315 or PHYS 381. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 474 or E E 474.
ECE 475 Optoelectronic and Photovoltaic Devices Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic optical properties of crystalline and amorphous semiconductor materials: energy band diagrams, optical constants. Recombination and light emission in semiconductors. Light emitting diodes: spectral characteristics, materials, and applications. Stimulated emission and laser oscillation conditions in semiconductors. Laser diodes: modal and spectral properties, steady state rate equations, materials and structures. Light absorption, optical to electrical energy conversion. Photovoltaic cells: fill factors and efficiency, temperature effects, alternative materials and structures. Prerequisite: ECE 302 or E E 340. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 475 or E E 475.
ECE 476 Engineering Electromagnetics II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Electrostatics and magnetostatics; Maxwell’s equations and plane waves. Transmission lines, Smith chart. Waveguides, cavity resonators. Radiation and antennas, dipoles. Prerequisites: ECE 370 or E E 315 or PHYS 381. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 476 or E E 476.
ECE 478 Microwave Circuits Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to RF/microwave circuits and their applications. Maxwell’s Equations and basic wave-propagation concepts. Transmission-line theory and impedance-matching techniques. Practical planar transmission lines. Lumped and distributed microwave-circuit elements. Microwave network analysis using impedance/admittance parameters, scattering parameters, and transmission-matrix methods. Analysis, design, fabrication, and test of practical RF/microwave devices including power dividers/combiners, couplers, amplifiers, and filters. Prerequisites: ECE 370 or E E 315 or PHYS 381. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 478 or E E 478.
ECE 485 Digital Communications Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Principles of digital communications; signal space concepts, digital modulation and demodulation, intersymbol interference, and pulse shaping. Design of optimal receivers; performance in the presence of channel noise. Introduction to source coding and channel coding. Prerequisites: ECE 342 or E E 387, and ECE 380 or E E 390. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 485 or E E 485.
ECE 486 Wireless Communications Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Characteristics of wireless channels; path loss, shadow fading and multipath propagation. Challenges in wireless system design, digital modulation techniques for wireless communications, transmitter and receiver design for fading channels. Fundamentals of cellular system design and multiple access techniques. Prerequisites: ECE 342 or E E 387, and ECE 380 or E E 390. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 486 or E E 486.
ECE 487 Data Communication Networks Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Network topologies. Layered architectures and the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference model. Peer-to-peer protocols, medium access control protocols, and local area network standards. Packet switched networks and routing, the TCP/IP suite of protocols. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 487, CMPUT 313 or CMPE 487.
ECE 489 Telecommunication System Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Telephony basics, subscriber loop plant, 2 Wire-4 Wire conversion, loss plan for echo-loss-delay. Traffic theories: Poisson, Erlang B, Engset, Erlang C, efficiency of large groups. Optimum alternate route design, network architecture, volume, stability assurance, call routing, multi-stage circuit switch design, central office functions, time-space- time and space-time-space switching. Point-to-point fibre links, optical networks. Prerequisites: ECE 342 or E E 387, and ECE 380 or E E 390. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 489 or E E 489.
ECE 490 Electrical Engineering Design Project I Œ2.5 (fi 8) (first term, 1-0-3). The first of two design courses that must be taken in the same academic year. Student teams research, propose, design, develop, document, prototype, and present a practical engineering system or device; teams exercise creativity and make assumptions and decisions based on technical knowledge. This first course includes project definition, planning, and initial prototyping. Formal reports and presentation of the project proposal is required. Prerequisite ECE 312. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 490 or E E 400.
ECE 491 Electrical Engineering Design Project II Œ2.5 (fi 8) (second term, 1-0-3). The second of two design courses that must be taken in the same academic year, in which student teams develop an electronic system or device from concept to working prototype. Emphasis is placed on continued execution of the project plan developed in ECE 490. Formal interim and final reports are required; groups demonstrate and present their designs. Prerequisite: ECE 490 or E E 400 in the preceding Fall term. Co-requisite: ECE 303. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 491 or E E 401.
ECE 492 Computer Engineering Design Project Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3/3-0-6). Design of microprocessor systems, input/output systems, programmable timers, address decoding and interrupt circuitry. This course has a major laboratory component and requires the design and implementation of a microprocessor-based system. Prerequisites: ECE 315 or CMPE 401, and ECE 410 or CMPE 480. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 450, 490, or ECE 492.
ECE 493 Software Systems Design Project Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 1-0-6). Design of software systems from concept to working prototype. Applying software engineering techniques. Working in small groups under constraints commonly experienced in industry. Exposing each team member to the design, implementation, documentation, and testing phases of the project. Managing software development projects. Provides a capstone experience in software development processes. Prerequisite: ECE 421 or CMPE 410. Credit may be obtained in only one of CMPE 440 or ECE 493.
ECE 494 Engineering Physics Design Project I Œ2.5 (fi 5) (first term, 1-0-3). The first of two design courses that must be taken in the same academic year. Students research and propose a design project to enhance or create an engineering system, process or device; they exercise creativity and make assumptions and decisions based on technical knowledge. This first course includes project definition, planning, and initial prototyping or design. Formal reports and presentation of the project proposal is required. Prerequisite: Completion of at least three years of study in the program or by consent of the Instructor. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 494 or E E 494.
ECE 495 Engineering Physics Design Project II Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 1-0-6). The second of two design courses that must be taken in the same academic year, in which students implement an engineering system, process or device. Emphasis is placed on continued execution of the project plan developed in ECE 494. Prerequisite: ECE 494 in the preceding Fall Term. Credit may be obtained in only one of ECE 495 or E E 495
Graduate Courses
ECE 501 Convex Optimization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory: Convex sets, functions, and optimization problems; linear, quadratic, geometric, and semidefinite programming; duality theory. Algorithms: smooth unconstrained minimization algorithms, sequential unconstrained minimization algorithms, derivative free optimization methods. Applications: geometrical problems, multi-criterion optimization and game theory, filter design and robust adaptive beamforming, communication systems design, VLSI design, control systems design.
ECE 502 Probability and Random Processes for Electrical Engineers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of probability theory, random variables, probability distribution and density functions, characteristic functions, convergence of random sequences, and laws of large numbers. Analysis of random processes, including stationarity, ergodicity, autocorrelation functions power spectral density, and transformation of random processes through linear systems. Application to communication systems.
ECE 511 Digital ASIC Design Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Design of digital application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) using synthesis CAD tools. Topics include design flow, hierarchical design, hardware description languages such as VHDL, synthesis, design verification, IC test, chip-scale synchronous design, field programmable gate arrays, mask programmable gate arrays, CMOS circuits and IC process technology. For the project, students will design and implement a significant digital system using field programmable gate arrays. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 511 or E E 552.
ECE 512 Digital System Testing and Design for Testability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Production testing versus design verification of digital VLSI/ULSI systems. Economics of testing. Defect distributions, yield analysis, and minimum fault coverage requirements. Fault modelling, fault simulation, and automatic test pattern generation. Memory testing. Iddq current-based testing. Design for testability (DFT) rules and strategies. Scan chain based DFT. Built-in self-test (BIST) circuits and architectures. The IEEE JTAG boundary scan and embedded core test standards. Advanced testing topics.
ECE 521 Software Requirements Engineering and Software Design Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Understanding needs of software-intensive systems. Converting the statement of needs into complete and unambiguous description of the requirements. Techniques for elicitation, analysis, and specification of requirements. Mapping of requirements into a description of their implementation. Software design techniques for capturing and expressing a different view of the system. Elements of architectural design, abstract specification, interface design, data structure and algorithm design.
ECE 522 Software Construction, Verification and Evolution Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Construction of software components identified and described in design documents. Translation of a design into an implementation language. Program coding styles. Concepts, methods, processes, and techniques supporting the ability of a software system to change, evolve, and survive. Verification of software ensuring fulfillment of the requirements. Validation of software products at different stages of development: unit testing, integration testing, system testing, performance testing, and acceptance testing.
ECE 530 Power Quality and Power Disturbance Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to power disturbances and power quality; Generation, characterization, mitigation and analysis of key power disturbances: harmonics, voltage sags and swells, and electromagnetic transients. Disturbance signal processing; Case studies using transients and harmonics programs; Application of power quality standards and practical aspects of power quality assessment; custom power technologies; Power signaling technology, i.e. applications of power disturbances for information transmission and extraction purposes; Generation of disturbances for power line communication and active condition monitoring; Current developments.
ECE 531 Industrial Drive Systems Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Variable speed control of induction motors; soft-starts. Utility interface of drives; pwm, csi and vvi drive systems; slip-energy recovery drives; medium voltage drives; application issues of industrial drive systems. Prerequisite: E E 332 and E E 431 or equivalent.
ECE 532 Clean Energy and Electrical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to introduce engineers to current and future options for environmentally aware generation, storage and use of electricity. The focus of the course will be the integration of existing and new electrical technologies and their interaction with electrical systems.
ECE 540 Detection and Estimation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Bayesian hypothesis testing model, likelihood ratio test (LRT), minimax test, Neyman-Pearson test, receiver operating characteristic (ROC), Bayesian estimation, linear least-squares (LS) estimation; maximum-likelihood (ML) estimation, composite hypothesis testing, introduction to signal detection.
ECE 541 Digital Signal Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discrete-time signals and systems, Discrete Fourier Transform, Fast Fourier Transform, Fourier analysis, short-time Fourier transform, wavelet transform. Digital filters, optimal filter design, polyphase filterbanks, subband analysis. Random signal analysis, Karhunen-Loève expansion, power spectrum estimation, autoregressive models.
ECE 546 Semiconductor Fundamentals for Device Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of energy-band theory of crystalline materials and Bloch’s theorem. Semiclassical electron dynamics, including electrons, holes, crystal momentum, particle motion, and effective mass. Carrier statistics. Fermi’s golden rule and carrier scattering. Relaxation times and carrier mobility. The Boltzmann transport equation, the method of moments, and the drift-diffusion equations. Advanced transport and applications to emerging ECE Calendar changes electronic devices. Prerequisite: An undergraduate course in solid-state devices or physics, or consent of the instructor.
ECE 547 Fundamentals of Solid State Devices Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of semiconductor fundamentals. Analysis of metal-semiconductor (MS), metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) and semiconductor heterojunctions including band diagram, depletion approximation, C-V and I-V characteristics. Advanced MOSFETs including short channel effects and scaling theory. Introduction to III-V FETs.
ECE 551 Design of CMOS Analog Integrated Circuits Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). MOS devices and modelling. Processing and layout. CMOS design rules. Basic current mirrors and single-stage amplifiers. High-output impedance current mirrors. MOS differential pair and gain stage. Basic opamp design and compensation. Two-stage CMOS opamp. Feedback and opamp compensation. Advanced current mirrors and opamps. Folded-cascode opamp. Current-mirror opamp. Fully differential opamps. Common-mode feedback circuits. Switched-capacitor circuits. Basic building blocks. Basic operation and analysis. First-order filters. Biquad filters. Continuous-time filters. CMOS transconductors. MOSFET-C filters. Noise analysis. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 551 or E E 633.
ECE 553 Digital Integrated Circuit Design Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Review of semiconductor materials, integrated circuit processing, and basic design flows using CAD tools. Electrical characteristics of interconnect, passive elements, diodes, MOSFETs and logic gates. Sequential elements, memory and datapath circuits. Pad design. Chip-level design including power and clock distribution. Scaling theory. Testing and design for testability. Emerging technologies. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 553 or E E 483 or 653.
ECE 558 Microfabrication and Nanofabrication Topics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Vacuum principles: gas kinetics and flow, pumping speed theory, pumping methods, pressure, measurement, sorption processes, vacuum system design basics. Thin film growth by sputtering, evaporation and chemical techniques. Characterization and classification of optical, electrical and mechanical properties. Applications of thin films. Note: May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in either E E 641 or 642.
ECE 559 Microfabrication and Nanofabrication Topics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The fabrication process for microelectronics and MEMs applications. Overview of processing steps: silicon wafer material, oxidation, lithography, diffusion, etching and ion implantation, chemical and physical vapor deposition, metallization. Process model. Yield, packaging, and assembly.
ECE 560 Modern Control Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). State space models of linear systems, solutions of linear state equations (time-invariant and time-varying systems). Controllability and observability. State space realizations, multivariable system descriptions, matrix polynomial and factorization. State feedback, eigenvalue assignment. State observers. Observer based state feedback control. Youla parameterization and all stabilizing controllers.
ECE 561 Nonlinear Control Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nonlinear system examples. Stability in the sense of Lyapunov. Lyapunov functions. The invariance principle. Lyapunov-based design. Backstepping. Input-output stability. Passivity and small-gain theorems. Input to state stability. Dissipativity. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 561 or E E 666.
ECE 570 Computational Electromagnetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of techniques and applications in compational electromagnetics. Finite-Difference Time-Domain solution of Maxwell’s equations: boundary conditions, numerical stability, numerical dispersion, near-to-far field transformation. Introduction to Finite-Elements Technique: basis and weighting functions, Galerkin’s method, nodal and edge elements, variational formulation, applications. Introduction to the Method of Moments: integral formulation of electrostatics, Green’s function, point matching and Galerkin’s method, treatment of open regions.
ECE 571 Optical and Quantum Electronics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Optical resonators. Interaction of radiation and atomic systems. Fabry-Perot lasers, specific laser systems. Modelocked and Q-switched lasers. Second-harmonic generation and parametric oscillation, electro-optic modulation of laser beams. Interaction of light with sound. Semiconductor lasers: theory and applications. Ultrafast lasers and phenomena.
ECE 572 Nonlinear Optics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental description of nonlinear optical phenomena in terms of higher order susceptibilities, quantum theory of nonlinear susceptibility, density matrix approach, rabi oscillations, optical bloch equations, Various specific nonlinear phenomena: electro-optic modulation, acousto-optic modulation, harmonic generation and frequency conversion, stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering and amplification, parametric oscillation and amplification, self phase modulation, soliton propagation, and photorefractive effects, Applications to optical switching.
ECE 576 Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of basic electromagnetic concepts, wave equations, propagation and its solutions, reflection, transmission and scattering, waveguides and resonators, electromagnetic theorems and principles, vector potentials, construction of solutions, and radiation, analytical techniques and applications.
ECE 577 Antenna Theory and Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mechanisms of radiation and propagation, fundamental Antenna parameters, antenna array analysis and synthesis, source modeling, traditional and low-profile resonant antennas, broadband antennas, aperture and horn antennas, antenna-measurement facilities and techniques, special topics addressing recent developments in antenna theory and design. Prerequisites: E E 315 or equivalent, and E E 470 and/or E E 478 or equivalent considered an asset.
ECE 578 Advanced Mircowave and Millimeter-wave Circuits Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of microwave and millimeter-wave circuit design, various transmission lines and their frequency dependency behavior, transition between different transmission lines, standard components realization and their analysis and applications, Emerging technologies and state of the art microwave and millimeter-wave circuit realization, System and higher level integration with focus on configurations and technological challenges, measurement techniques and instruments.
ECE 582 Information Theory and Channel Coding Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Information theory as applied to digital signals. Source coding. The channel coding theorem, linear error control codes, and algebraic error correction coding. Concatenation of codes and iterative decoding.
ECE 583 Digital Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis and design of digital communication systems based on probability theory and signal space representation. Comparison of different modulation techniques in terms of performance and resource usage. Performance of various detection methods in AWGN and other types of channels.
ECE 601 MSc Research Project Definition Œ2.5 (fi 5) (second term, 0-1s-0). Basics of how to prepare a good research proposal. Preparation of a report defining the proposed MSc thesis research. Presentations by MSc students on their thesis research proposal.
ECE 602 PhD Research Project Definition Œ2.5 (fi 5) (second term, 0-1s-0). Basics of how to prepare a good research proposal. Preparation of a report defining the proposed PhD thesis research. Presentations by PhD students on their thesis research proposal.
ECE 623 Data Exploration and Evolutionary Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Learning, adaptation, self-organization and evolution. Data preprocessing, feature selection and generation. Exploratory data analysis. Optimization methods, genetic algorithms, evolutionary programming, evolution strategies, genetic programming. Alternative paradigms, artificial immune systems, swarm intelligence. Applications.
ECE 624 Fuzzy Sets in Human-Centric Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Developments in human-centric systems. Fuzzy sets and information granulation. Computing with fuzzy sets: logic operators, mapping, fuzzy relational calculus. Fuzzy models and rule-based models. Fuzzy neural networks. Fuzzy clustering and unsupervised learning.
ECE 625 Data Analysis and Knowledge Discovery Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Approaches, techniques and tools for data analysis and knowledge discovery. Introduction to machine learning, data mining, and the knowledge discovery process; data storage including database management systems, data warehousing, and OLAP; testing and verification methodologies; data preprocessing including missing data imputation and discretization; supervised learning including decision trees, Bayesian classification and networks, support vector machines, and ensemble methods; unsupervised learning methods including association mining and clustering; information retrieval.
ECE 626 Advanced Neural Networks Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory and advanced topics in neural networks and connectionist systems. Fast backpropagation techniques including Levenberg- Marquardt and conjugate-gradient algorithms. Regularization theory. Information- theoretic learning, statistical learning, dynamic programming, neurodynamics, complex-valued neural networks.
ECE 627 Intelligent Web Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Representation, processing, and application of knowledge in emerging concepts of Semantic Web: ontology, ontology construction, and ontology integration; propositional, predicate and description logics; rules and reasoning; Semantic Web services; Folksonomy and Social Web; Semantic Web applications.
ECE 633 Modeling and Simulation of Electromagnetic Transients in Electrical Circuits Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of electromagnetic transients in electrical power systems. Computer-aided analysis of electronic circuits. Models of commonly used power system components for time-domain simulation: linear and nonlinear elements, transmission lines, transformers machines, models for the latest power electronic compensators, solution algorithms, analog simulators, real-time digital simulations, architectures and algorithms for parallel and distributed simulators. Transient simulation software.
ECE 635 Power Converters and Renewable Energy Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers: power converter topologies (including DC-DC converters, DC-AC converters, two level and multilevel converters, voltage source converters, current source converters). PWM methods (including Sine PWM, Space Vector PWM, Hysteresis PWM, Selective Harmonic Elimination PWM, and PWM for multilevel converters) and implementation techniques. Wind power systems, PV systems, fuel cell systems and the power converters used in these systems. Operation/control issues of renewable energy systems.
ECE 636 Dynamics and Controls of Voltage-Source Converters Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Power circuit topologies and energy conversion principles, Large/small-signal and harmonic models, Current and voltage controls (PI, resonant, predictive, sliding mode, etc.), Energy/power control and management, Grid-synchronization and fault-ride-through techniques, Observer- theory applications, Robust and adaptive control techniques, applications in Distributed Generation (DG), Micro-grids, DSTATCOM, Active Power Filter (APF), HVDC-light, etc.
ECE 644 Digital Image and Video Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sampling and Quantization. Digital transforms for multimedia signal processing: DFT, DCT, DST, K-L transform, principal component analysis, subband analysis, wavelet and multi-resolution representation. Image processing: histogram processing, image filtering and enhancement, halftone and dithering for binary image processing, color transforms, color image processing. Video processing: basic video models, spatial-temporal processing of video, morphing and wipe detection, video segmentation and content analysis. Applications: medical imaging, satellite imaging, seismology.
ECE 646 Organic Electronics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Chemical structure, nomenclature, crystal structure and electronic structure of organic semiconductors. Charge carriers and charge transport in crystalline organic semiconductors, amorphous small-molecule organic semiconductors and conjugated polymers. Luminescence and energy transfer in organic semiconductors. Device applications including organic field effect transistors, organic light emitting diodes and organic solar cells. Characterization of organic semiconductors and devices.
ECE 647 Compact Modeling of High Performance Electronics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to exercise modeling of electronic devices for high performance applications (Digital, High Frequency Analog and Power Electronics). The basic application of physical device principles will be transformed to functional computational device models for system and circuit design applications. Students will implement a transistor model for a device of their choosing using the device physics and modeling concepts developed here.
ECE 658 Microsensors and Microelectromechanical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of Micromachining Technologies, Lumped Modeling and Energy Conserving Transducers, Review of Elasticity and Micromechanical Structures, Case Study : Piezoelectric Pressure Sensors, Case Study : Capacitive Accelerometers, Overview of Microfluidics, Case Study: PCR-on-a-chip systems.
ECE 664 Nonlinear Control Design with Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nonlinear geometric control and observer design methods for multi-input nonlinear systems. Differential geometric tools including manifolds, Lie derivatives, Lie brackets, distributions, and the Frobenius Theorem. Conditions for local and global exact and partial state feedback linearization. Output tracking design using input-output state feedback linearization. Local and global nonlinear observer design using exact error linearization. Output feedback control including output feedback linearization and output feedback stabilization based on normal forms. Design methods learnt in this course are implemented on a real physical system.
ECE 665 Multivariable Robust Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). MIMO control systems. Standard setup. Mathematical preliminaries (singular value decomposition, norms, and function spaces), Stability and performance analysis of MIMO control systems. Stabilization. Controller parameterization. Uncertain systems and uncertainty representations. Stability and performance analysis of uncertain control systems. Linear matrix inequalities (LMIs) and convex optimization. Modern control design: H-2 and H-infinity optimization via LMIs.
ECE 671 Nonlinear Optics and Nanophotonics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental description of nonlinear optical phenomena in terms of higher order susceptibilities. Various specific nonlinear phenomena: electro-optic modulation, acousto-optic modulation, harmonic generation and frequency conversion, stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering and amplification, parametric oscillation and amplification, self phase modulation, soliton propagation, and photorefractive effects. Nanocomposites, quantum well and quantum dot devices, photonic bandgap crystals. Applications to engineering laser and fiber optic communication systems. Note: Only one of the following courses may be taken for credit: ECE 671 or E E 684.
ECE 672 Photonics of Structured Media Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental aspects of light-matter interactions in homogeneous and artificially structured media. Guided, radiation, and leaky modes in structured media: waveguides, resonant cavities, and periodic media. Photonic bandgaps, Bloch and surface waves, photonic crystals and applications. Optics of metals, surface plasmons, subwavelength confinement of light, nanoscale photonic devices. Artificial atoms, metamaterials, negative index materials and applications.
ECE 673 Laser Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Laser systems, beam optics and laser propagation. Interference and interferometers. Laser matter interactions including laser absorption, energy transport and laser ablation mechanisms. Laser applications in microscale engineering, nanoscale engineering, photonics, science and medical science.
ECE 675 Plasma Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Engineering of plasmas for applications in fusion, space, astrophysics, microelectronic processing, plasma-assisted manufacturing and microwave generation. Characterization of the plasma state, charged particle dynamics in electric and magnetic fields, the two-fluid model, magnetohydrodynamic model, linear and nonlinear waves, atomic and collisional processes, transport properties.
ECE 683 Broadband Digital Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Direct sequence and frequency hopping spread spectrum techniques, and code division multiple access (CDMA). Orthogonal frequency division multiplexing and multicarrier CDMA. Capacity of multiple-input multiple-output systems, space-time coding, and space-time layering. Principles of multi-user detection with optimum and sub-optimum approaches. Selected industry standards.
ECE 684 Wireless Communication Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of wireless systems, large and small scale propagation effects in mobile radio channels, cochannel interference, diversity and diversity combining techniques, architecture and capacity of TDMA and CDMA cellular systems. Prerequisites: ECE 583 or consent of instructor and an undergraduate level probability course.
ECE 686 Wireless Communication Networks Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with the architecture, protocols, modeling, and evaluation of wireless communication networks in transport of multimedia traffic. Specifically, this course studies queuing theory, traffic modeling, radio resource allocation, call admission control, access control, multiple access, and mobility management in existing and emerging advanced wireless networks.
ECE 691 Biomedical Optics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to provide a firm understanding of the physical and theoretical basis of biomedical optics. Both theoretic aspects of light propagation in tissue as well as practical imaging and sensing systems will be discussed. Single and multiple scattering of light is modeled, and light- transport and diffusion equations are developed. Imaging and sensing platforms including various microscopy technologies, optical-coherence tomography systems, and diffuse-imaging methods are analyzed in detail. Selected topics may include photoacoustic imaging, optical dyes and nanoparticle agents, novel emerging microscopy and deep-tissue imaging technologies, and applications to biological and clinical problems. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
ECE 692 Ultrasound Imaging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Acoustics and imaging systems; acoustic wave propagation, refraction, reflection, and scattering. Rayleigh equation; transient and steady-state radiation characteristics of simple structures. Modeling, design, and characterization of transmitting and receiving transducers, including micromachined ultrasound transducers. Imaging systems; accounting for the stochastic nature of ultrasound images, image quality metrics. Selected topics may include nonlinear acoustics, Doppler estimation of blood flow, photoacoustic imaging, and medical applications.
ECE 710 Advanced Topics in Computer Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 720 Advanced Topics in Software Engineering and Intelligent Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 730 Advanced Topics in Energy Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 740 Advanced Topics in Signal and Image Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 745 Advanced Topics in Solid State Electronics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 750 Advanced Topics in Integrated Circuits and Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 755 Advanced Topics in Microsystems and Nanodevices Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 760 Advanced Topics in Control Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 770 Advanced Topics in Photonics and Plasmas Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 775 Advanced Topics in Electromagnetics and Microwaves Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 780 Advanced Topics in Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 790 Advanced Topics in Biomedical Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ECE 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned).
ECE 910 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Engineering Management
ENG M
Department of Mechanical Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
ENG M 310 Engineering Economy Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). The application of the fundamentals of economics to engineering alternatives in planning, developing and managing industrial projects. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for more than one of ENGG 310, 401, ENG M 310 or 401.
ENG M 401 Financial Management for Engineers Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of the fundamentals of engineering economics, financial analysis and market assessment to engineering alternatives in the planning, development and ongoing management of industrial enterprises. The course covers the use of engineering, economic, financial and market assessment information in investment and business operation decisions in technology oriented companies. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for more than one of ENGG 310, ENGG 401, ENG M 310, or ENG M 401.
ENG M 402 Project Management and Entrepreneurship Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the conceptual and practical considerations in identifying and developing new products. The theory and practice of project management applied to the creation of new business activities and ventures will be discussed. Topics include project management, innovation and entrepreneurship, business planning, marketing, and mobilizing human and financial resources. These will be applied in the development of a business plan for a business concept. The course is intended to provide engineering and business students with an awareness of specific planning, budgeting and scheduling techniques that can be used to implement and monitor new business activities. This course is open to Business and Science students with consent of Instructor. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both ENGG 402 and ENG M 402.
ENG M 405 Engineering, Business and Society Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of engineering and management in achieving the objectives of technology oriented enterprises, and the impact of technology on society. The course covers alternate forms of organization, key differences between management of a one time project and an ongoing operation, the impact of work on society, individual variations in personality and management style and the implications for managing, and specific issues in human resource and quality management. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both ENGG 405 and ENG M 405.
ENG M 406 Adapting Technology to Meet Societal Needs Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Assessing impact of technology on companies and society using marketing principles. How societal issues drive customer needs and how those needs are recognized and met. Topics include pre-engagement strategies (market research methods, customer contact process, customer/client adoption life cycle), engagement strategies (proposal preparation, contract development, and scheduling) and post-engagement strategies (winning contracts and developing long-term sound client relationships). Prerequisites: Open to all third or fourth year engineering students, or consent of instructor.
ENG M 408 Manufacturing Systems and Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Manufacturing process modeling and system design; computer aided process planning; scheduling of manufacturing activities; computer aided manufacturing; integration for different machining processes; plastic parts and mold design; sheet metal parts and die design; robotics in manufacturing; welding process and control; Design considerations; Shop floor control; and engineering collaboration. Prerequisite: MEC E 265.
Graduate Courses
ENG M 501 Production and Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Production and operations management, analysis, and design of work, forecasting, inventory management including MRP, JIT, and Kanban, maintenance management, facility layout, operations scheduling, and project planning and management. Credit cannot be obtained in both ENG M 501 and MEC E 513. Prerequisites: one of ENGG 310, 401 or ENG M 310, 401 and STAT 235 or equivalent.
ENG M 508 Energy Auditing and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Concepts and value of energy management and conservation. Methodologies for energy management in energy intensive systems in various industries. Energy auditing methods and implementation. Energy accounting and economic analysis. Energy audits and maintenance. Exposure to software for energy auditing.
ENG M 510 Quality Engineering and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Quality engineering and management evolution, definitions, concepts and principles. Essential quality management theories and models. ISO 9000 principles models and applications. Seven quality engineering and management tools. Quality function deployment. Failure analysis. Quality costing. Statistical quality. Credit cannot be obtained in both ENG M 510 and MEC E 512. Prerequisites: STAT 235 or equivalent.
ENG M 514 Reliability Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Concepts of reliability, failure rate, maintainability, and availability. Properties of various statistical distributions and their applications in reliability engineering. Failure data analysis techniques including probability plotting. Load and strength interference in mechanical component design. System reliability models and system reliability evaluation methods. Optimal system design considering reliability issues. Prerequisite: STAT 235 or equivalent.
ENG M 516 Maintenance Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Maintenance management of industrial assets. Preventative maintenance decisions. Spare parts provisioning. Predictive maintenance decisions. Reliability centered maintenance. Total productive maintenance. Case studies. Prerequisite: STAT 235 or equivalent.
ENG M 530 Engineering Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to project management tools, techniques, templates, and methodologies. This course examines the eight knowledge areas of the Project Management Institute (PMI) which provide an integrated approach to managing engineering projects. Prerequisites: One of ENGG 310, 401 or ENG M 310, 401.
ENG M 540 Introduction to Optimization Models and Algorithms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to optimization methods in solving engineering management problems. Both modeling techniques and algorithms will be covered. Topics include linear programming, formulation and modeling techniques, the simplex method, sensitivity analysis, duality, transportation and network problems, algorithmic and heuristic methods, integer programming, and/ or non-linear programming. Credit cannot be obtained in both ENG M 540 and ENG M 640.
ENG M 558 Ergonomics and Work Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental methods for the analysis of human systems in industrial engineering. Human-machine interaction. Engineering of the workplace and the work environment. Motion and time study. Standards in ergonomics and work design.
ENG M 605 Computer-Aided Product modeling and Production Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Computer-aided engineering software modeling and implementation methodology; Feature-based product modeling development; Feature-based manufacturing process modeling; Engineering data integration; Production system engineering; System integration in production engineering; Advanced product and process engineering informatics with networked collaboration.
ENG M 607 Lean Manufacturing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of lean manufacturing concepts, tools and techniques. Identifying waste. Value stream mapping, push vs. pull systems data analysis tools, cell layout design, operator balance charts, 5S, set up time reduction, work in process minimization, standardized work, visual management, and optimized floor space. Introduction to six sigma tools.
ENG M 611 Design and Integration of Standardized Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Design, development and use of international assurance and management standards in manufacturing, service and energy industries. Creation of standardized systems for quality, environmental, safety, security, responsibility, risk and other aspects of the organization. Modeling of integration frameworks and methodologies. Auditing, maintenance and improvement of integrated management systems.
ENG M 612 Quality Assurance and Assessment Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current theory and practice of quality management systems. Modeling of systems and supporting technologies for performance management and improvement. ISO 9000 and 10000 standards, business excellence models and performance measurement. Application of quality assurance schemes in manufacturing, service and not-profit organizations. Design, implementation and improvement of assurance systems using auditing and self-assessment models. Auditing standards and self-assessment guidelines.
ENG M 620 Engineering Economic Analysis Œ4 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s-0). Advanced topics in engineering economics including operating and capital budgets, financial statement use by managers, replacement analysis, cost of capital and leasing. Credit cannot be obtained for both ENG M 620 and ENG M 401.
ENG M 632 Project Risk Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth study of the risk management framework as adopted by Project Management Institute. Responsibilities and risks encountered while managing any project. Identification and quantification of risk in design and execution of projects, strategies to handle risk, and issues related to decision making in the face of uncertainty.
ENG M 641 Engineering Applications in Optimization of Large Scale Linear Problems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Engineering Applications of Integer linear programming, solution techniques, solver applications, modeling and (re)formulation, valid inequalities and redundant constraints, Lagrangian relaxation, decomposition techniques, column generation, meta-heuristic approaches. Prerequisites: ENG M 540 or equivalent.
ENG M 643 Energy Simulation and Modeling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Methodologies for simulation of energy systems. Energy forecasting and planning models. Modeling and forecasting of energy and environmental scenarios. Use of energy and environment database models. Decision support systems for the energy industry. Exposure to software relevant to the energy industry.
ENG M 646 Engineering Optimization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The applications of optimization techniques in solving engineering problems. Linear programming, non-linear programming, dynamic programming, integer programming, stochastic programming, genetic algorithms, heuristic methods, queuing theory, and new optimization methods. Credit may not be obtained in more than one of ENG M 640, MEC E 612, and ENG M 646. Prerequisite: ENG M 540 or consent of Instructor.
ENG M 657 Interpersonal Skills for Project Managers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical basis of speaking and listening skills supported by exercises and practical examples. Non-verbal clues, assumptions and perceptions in communication. Applications in negotiations, conflict management and decision making.
ENG M 665 Introduction to Intellectual Property and New Technology Commercialization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intellectual property in the context of technology transfer and commercialization. Key topics include intellectual property, product development, valuation of technology, capturing value, and securing the deal. Considerations in identifying and developing new products, exploitation of intellectual property as a corporate strategy, the impact of intellectual property in new company formation and growth.
ENG M 666 Knowledge Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Knowledge Management (KM) concepts, Knowledge Acquisition, Building and Sharing Corporate Memory, Knowledge Driven Innovation, Knowledge Capital Value, Knowledge Professionals, KM Technologies, Case Studies, Team Projects. Prerequisite/Corequisite: approval of instructor.
ENG M 670 Advanced Topics in Engineering Management I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENG M 680 Advanced Topics in Engineering Management II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Engineering Physics
EN PH
Department of Physics
Faculties of Engineering and Science
Undergraduate Courses
EN PH 131 Mechanics Œ4.3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-3/2). Kinematics and dynamics of particles; gravitation; work and energy; linear momentum; angular momentum; systems of particles; introduction to dynamics of rigid bodies. Prerequisites: MATH 100 or 117, and ENGG 130. Corequisite: MATH 101 or 118. Restricted to Engineering students. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0.
#
Engineering, Computer
ENCMP
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
ENCMP 100 Computer Programming for Engineers Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Fundamentals of computer programming with emphasis on solving engineering problems. Structure and syntax of computer programs, variables, data types, data structures, control structures, functions, input/output operations, debugging, software development process.
#
Engineering, General
ENGG
Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
ENGG 100 Orientation to the Engineering Profession I Œ1 (fi 3) (first term, 1-0-0). An introduction to the Faculty of Engineering and the engineering profession: the engineering disciplines; study skills; cooperative education; work opportunities; engineering and society including elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act.
ENGG 101 Orientation to the Engineering Profession II Œ1 (fi 3) (second term, 1-0-0). An introduction to the engineering profession and its challenges: the engineering disciplines, career fields; professional responsibilities of the engineer including elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act.
ENGG 130 Engineering Mechanics Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-2). Equilibrium of planar systems. Analysis of statically determinate trusses and frames. Friction. Centroids and centres of gravity. Forces and moments in beams. Second moments of area. Note: Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. Corequisite: MATH 100.
ENGG 299 Orientation to Cooperative Education Œ1.5 (fi 3) (first term, 1-1s-0). An examination of the history, philosophy and objectives of Cooperative Education; introduction to the operation of the Cooperative Education Program; self-assessment of transferable skills and work values; preparation of the resume; practice of job interview skills; goal setting on the job; ethics; human rights; and public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Note: This course is only open to students registered in the Cooperative Education Program and must be taken prior to a student’s first work placement.
ENGG 400 The Practice of the Engineering Profession Œ1 (fi 3) (either term, 1-0-0). The technical and professional duties and responsibilities of the engineer; the ethics of the engineering profession; technical and professional organizations. The role of the engineer in the social environment including elements of equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students. Must be taken in last term of program.
ENGG 404 Engineering Safety and Risk Management-Leadership in Risk Management Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-3s/2-0). Basic concepts of risk and consequences of loss incidents; risk management principles and practices; incident investigation, causation, root cause analysis; process safety management; the roles of government agencies, professional bodies and industry associations; workplace safety; risk-based decision-making processes; leadership and the human-factors side of risk management. The course focuses on the principles and practices of leadership towards the effective application and implementation of risk management in major organizations across all engineering disciplines. Industry virtual tours, case studies, seminars and team projects specific to the student’s engineering program will be used to develop competencies and proficiencies in applying leadership and organizational effectiveness for successful risk management.
ENGG 406 Engineering Safety and Risk Management - Methodologies and Tools Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-3s/2-0). Basic concepts of risk and consequences of loss incidents; risk review methodologies and tools: hazard and operability (HAZOP), failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA), fire and explosion indices (F and EI),chemical exposure index (CEI), layers of protection analysis (LOPA) including hazard identification, risk analysis, risk assessment, loss prevention and control; process safety management; specific occupational health and safety code compliance requirements for professional engineers. Case studies and industrial tour(s) demonstrate the application of specialized tools and methodologies in complex industrial operations across all engineering disciplines. Seminars and team projects develop competencies and proficiencies in applying these specialized methodologies and tools towards proactive risk management. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
ENGG 420 Engineering Law Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Contracts; specifications; tenders; bonds; construction contract forms; Public Works Act; Workers’ Compensation Act; building trades; company law; the engineer as an expert witness; patents; trade marks; copyrights; negligence; arbitration. Note: Restricted enrolment. Registration approval by Dean’s office only. Credit will not be granted for both ENGG 420 and B LAW 301.
ENGG 490 Engineering Leadership Lab Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 0-2s/2-6). Course based on discussions with leaders on topics including responsible leadership, creating sustainable and innovative organisations, and entrepreneurship. Variable meeting times in addition to biweekly seminar discussion. Requires a substantive report and presentation on the impact of effective leadership with a particular focus on current trends and thoughts in leadership theory and practice. Only open to students accepted by the Faculty of Engineering in the Minor in Business program or to others with Faculty of Engineering approval.
Graduate Courses
ENGG 600 Engineering Ethics and Professionalism Œ0.5 (fi 1) (either term, 1 day). The technical and professional duties and responsibilities of the engineer. Academic integrity and research ethics. Intellectual property. The ethics of the engineering profession; technical and professional organizations. The impact of engineering decisions on society, including elements of equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Intellectual property. Note: Restricted to engineering graduate students.
#
English
ENGL
Department of English and Film Studies Faculty of Arts
Note: Courses in the Department of English and Film Studies teach the English language and its several literatures; some works may be taught in translation as necessary to fulfil the primary goal of understanding English literature.
See also Writing, WRITE. Except as noted, WRITE courses may be taken as ENGL courses.
Undergraduate Courses
Notes
(1) Any two (*6) from ENGL 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, or any one (*3) plus WRS 101 will serve as the prerequisite to all senior English courses, or will fulfill degree requirements for faculties that require first-year English. All 6 of the above noted junior ENGL courses study selected works from a range of genres (poetry, drama, fiction or nonfiction). Students with credit in ENGL 100, 101, 111, 112, 113, or 114 may not take the current ENGL 121, 122, 123, 124, 125 or 126.
(2) No more than *6 in junior English, or equivalent, may be taken for credit in an undergraduate program.
(3) Junior English courses require a substantial amount of writing in essays and tests, and devote a minimum of 30% of class time to writing instruction.
(4) All senior courses have as prerequisite any two (*6) taken from ENGL 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126 or equivalent; or any one (*3) plus WRS 101; prerequisites for 400-level courses are *12 of senior ENGL, *6 of which must be at the 300-level (as numbered in this edition of the Calendar, including any specific course prerequisites in the individual course descriptions).
(5) Courses at the 200 level need not be tied to any one national literature or historical period.
(6) Not all senior courses are offered in any given year.
ENGL 102 Introduction to Critical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces methods of critical analysis through a range of literature written in English, broadly conceived, from different historical periods and cultural locations. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English.
ENGL 103 Case Studies in Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This variable content course introduces methods of literary research as an in-depth process through one or more case studies. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English. Note: Refer to the Class Schedule and the Department of English and Film Studies website for specific topics.
ENGL 108 Introduction to Language and Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course combines formal instruction in writing with a study of the essay and the short story. One-half of class time will be devoted to writing instruction. Note: Not to be taken by students in Arts and Education. This course will be offered by arrangement with client Faculties.
ENGL 125 Aboriginal Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in Aboriginal knowledge, values, and identity in written expression, and other cultural texts. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English. Note: Sections reserved for students in the TYP Program include a 3 hour seminar component in addition to the 3 hour lecture component.
ENGL 199 Essentials of Writing for Engineering Students Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to develop the student’s ability to write the narrative, descriptive, expository, and persuasive prose fundamental to all written communication. Instruction and practice will be integrated with the study of prose models drawn from modern essayists. A review of basic grammar will be included. Note: Restricted to students in the Faculty of Engineering only.
ENGL 208 Reading Histories: Making Books Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the social and cultural history of material text, and to the critical concepts and methods key to its study, that emphasizes the relationship between the production of books and the production of culture. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 209 Reading Histories: Making Readers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the social and cultural history of reading, and to the critical concepts and methods key to its study, that emphasizes the relationship between reading and the production of culture. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 210 Reading Histories: Histories in Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the critical concepts and methods for reading literary texts historically that emphasizes the relationship between representation and history. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 212 Introduction to the English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces the grammar of English sounds, words, and sentences as a basis for further studies in language and literature. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 217 Textualities: Signs and Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theories of signification and textuality, and to the issues and debates surrounding the relationship between language systems and the production of meanings, as they bear on literary analysis. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 218 Textualities: Reading and Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theories of reading and interpretation, and to the issues and debates surrounding the relationship between literary events and the reception of meanings, as they bear on literary analysis. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 219 Textualities: Narrative Theory and Poetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to narratology and poetics, as well as to the practices of close reading and the formalist analysis of literary texts, as they bear on literary analysis. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 220 Reading Politics: Gender and Sexuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to dynamics of gender and sexuality in literary and other cultural texts, and to the critical concepts and methods key to their study. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 221 Reading Politics: Class and Ideology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to dynamics of class and ideology in literary and other cultural texts, and to the critical concepts and methods key to their study. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 222 Reading Politics: Race and Ethnicity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to dynamics of race and ethnicity in literary and other cultural texts, and to the critical concepts and methods key to their study. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 223 Reading Politics: Empire and the Postcolonial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to dynamics of colonization and its resistances in literary and other cultural texts, and to the critical concepts and methods key to their study. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 224 The Literary Institution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theories of the literary institution and to the issues and debates surrounding literary criticism as a social and political practice that takes place within the horizon of history and under certain systemic constraints. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 299 Essay Writing for Education Students Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course, designed to increase the student’s ability to write effective essays, emphasizes the study of grammar, punctuation, and sentence and paragraph structure. The study of models of prose style is integrated with frequent practice in writing. ENGL 299 is not a remedial course. Note: Restricted to students in the Faculty of Education; not to be taken by students with credit in WRITE 298, 398 or 498. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 300 Social and Cultural History of the English Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the historical development of the English Language. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in former ENGL 311.
ENGL 301 Social and Cultural History of Genre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the theory and practice of genre. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 302 Literary and Cultural Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in critical and theoretical currents within literary studies. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 303 Computing Technology and Culture: Cyberculture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in cyberculture as a theoretical concept and a literary practice. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 304 Computing Technology and Culture: Digital Humanities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Connections between computing and the humanities with an emphasis on literary applications. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 305 Literature and Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in selected texts, movements, and traditions that reflect the interaction of religion with literature and culture. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 308 Aboriginal/Indigenous Literature: Intellectual Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies of the contributions of the First Nations, Métis and American Indian writers to the formation of Aboriginal/Indigenous intellectual and community traditions. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 309 Aboriginal/Indigenous Literature: Literary Movements Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the literary and cultural currents within Aboriginal/Indigenous writing. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 312 Postcolonial Literature and Culture: African Writing in English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the African context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 314 Postcolonial Literature and Culture: Irish Writing in English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Irish context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 315 Postcolonial Literature and Culture: Indian Writing in English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Indian context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 316 Postcolonial Literature and Culture: Middle-Eastern Writing in English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Middle-Eastern context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 320 Old English Language and Literature Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Studies in the language and literature of Anglo- Saxon England. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 324 Medieval Literature and Culture: Chaucer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 325 Medieval Literature and Culture: Medieval Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works in the English language from the medieval period. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in the former ENGL 321 or 322. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 327 Medieval Literature and Culture: Medieval and Tudor Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected dramatic works from the English context, 13th to 16th century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 336 Early Modern Literature and Culture: 16th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the English context. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 337 Early Modern Literature and Culture: Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected dramatic works from the English context, 16th and 17th centuries. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English.
ENGL 338 Early Modern Literature and Culture: Shakespeare Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 239 or 339.
ENGL 339 Early Modern Literature and Culture: Studies in Shakespeare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 338.
ENGL 340 Early Modern Literature and Culture: 17th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the English context. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 341 Restoration and 18th-Century Literature and Culture: Restoration and Early 18th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context, 1660 to 1750. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 343 Restoration and 18th-Century Literature and Culture: Late 18th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context, 1740 to 1800. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 344 Early Modern Literature and Culture: Milton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 340.
ENGL 348 Restoration and 18th-Century Literature and Culture: The Novel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected prose fiction from the British context, 1660 to 1800. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 349 19th-Century British Literature and Culture: The Novel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected novels from the British context, 1800 to 1900. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 350 19th-Century British Literature and Culture: Romantic Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context, 1789 to 1830. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 351.
ENGL 352 19th-Century British Literature and Culture: Early Victorian Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context, 1830 to 1870. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 353 19th-Century British Literature and Culture: Late Victorian Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context, 1870 to 1900. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 355 American Literature and Culture: American Minority Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by minority writers in America. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 357 American Literature and Culture: Reading American Ideologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in issues and problems of ideology in works from the American context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 358 American Literature and Culture: Early American Writing- Colonial, Revolutionary, Antebellum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the American context, first contact to 1865. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 359 American Literature and Culture: Reading American Origins Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in issues and problems of origination in works from the American context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 360 American Literature and Culture: Race and Belonging in American Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in issues and problems of racialization in works from the American context. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 361 American Literature and Culture: The American Modern - Postbellum and Early 20th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the American context, 1865 to 1945. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 362 American Literature and Culture: Toward the Now - Later 20th and Early 21st Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the American context, 1945 to the present. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 363 Early 20th-Century Literature and Culture: Modernism and Modernity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in high, low and late modernism, and the international avant-garde to mid-century. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in former ENGL 370. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 364 Late 20th-Century Literature and Culture: Modernism and Modernity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in post-modernism and the international avant-garde since mid-century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 365 Early 20th-Century British Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context to mid- century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 370.
ENGL 366 Late 20th-Century British Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the British context since mid-century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 367 Contemporary Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the contemporary context. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 368 Early 20th-Century Literature and Culture: Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected dramatic works in English to mid-century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 369 Late 20th-Century Literature and Culture: Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected dramatic works in English since mid-century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 373 Canadian Literature and Culture: Writing and Colonization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Canadian context, first contact to 1900. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 371.
ENGL 374 Canadian Literature and Culture: Early 20th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Canadian context to mid- century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 372.
ENGL 375 Canadian Literature and Culture: Reading Canadian Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the cultural politics of representation in Canadian texts. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 376 Canadian Literature and Culture: Late 20th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the Canadian context since mid-century. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: not to taken by students with credit in ENGL 372.
ENGL 377 Canadian Literature and Culture: Canadian Drama and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by Canadian dramatists and performance artists. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 378 Canadian Literature and Culture: Contemporary Cultural Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works from the contemporary Canadian context. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 380 Canadian Literature and Culture: Reading the Local Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in regional writing in Canada. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 384 Popular Culture: Reading Popular Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the popular tradition. Content and period focus may vary. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in the former ENGL 383. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 385 Popular Culture: Issues in Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory and practice of popular culture studies. Content and period focus may vary. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in the former ENGL 383. *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 388 Children’s Literature and Culture: Oral Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in texts from oral traditions, their modern derivatives, and historical, critical and theoretical approaches to oral texts. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 389 Children’s Literature and Culture: Print Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in texts from the print traditions, including picture books, historical, critical and theoretical approaches to print texts. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 390 Women’s Writing: Writing by Women Pre-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by women writers in English before the twentieth century. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in former ENGL 390.
ENGL 391 Women’s Writing: Writing by Women Post-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected works by women writers in English since 1900. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ENGL 391 Writing by Women II.
ENGL 392 Queer Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the movements, literatures, and cultures of sexual minorities, including gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered people. Content and period focus may vary. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English, or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101.
ENGL 401 Studies in Authors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 402 Studies in Genres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated..
ENGL 405 Studies in Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 407 Studies in Texts and Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 409 Studies in Literary Periods and Cultural Movements Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 424 Studies in the History of Books Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 426 Studies in Literary and Cultural Histories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 430 Studies in Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 465 Studies in Gender and Sexualities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 467 Studies in Race and Ethnicity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 481 Studies in Empire and the Postcolonial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 482 Studies in Drama and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 483 Studies in Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 484 Studies in Literature and Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 486 Studies in Computer Technologies and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: *6 of junior English or *3 of junior English plus WRS 101; and *12 of senior-level English, *6 of which must be at the 300 level. Note: variable content course which may be repeated.
ENGL 498 Honors Essay Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Required of all Honors students. In the first term of the final year, the Advisor will organize a prefatory meeting for the second term course. Students will be required to participate in a peer workshop and consult with a faculty member on their essay in the second term.
ENGL 533 Directed Reading in Fourth-Year Honors English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Note: Students may take this directed-reading course no more than once during their program.
Graduate Courses
Selected courses from the following list will be offered each year. Details of each year’s program may be obtained early in the preceding spring from the Department.
ENGL 553 Directed Reading Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 554 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 555 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 567 Literary History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 569 Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 574 Creative Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 575 Digital Humanities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 579 Gender Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 583 Cultural Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 585 Aboriginal Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 586 American Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 591 Canadian Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 615 Medieval Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 635 Early Modern Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 647 17th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 659 Restoration and 18th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 665 Romantic Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 673 Victorian Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 679 20th-Century Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 680 Post-Colonial Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 687 Children’s Texts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 693 Literary Genres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 694 Literary Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 695 Literary Themes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 800 PhD Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 801 PhD Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
ENGL 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned).
#
English for Academic Purposes
EAP
English as a Second Language Program Faculty of Extension
Undergraduate Courses
EAP 135 Introduction to Academic English Œ0 (fi 19) (either term, variable). Focuses on the development of language fluency and accuracy and on building the necessary vocabulary for further studies within an academic environment. Listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills are emphasized by engaging students in a variety of academic activities. This course, which precedes EAP 140, will enable students to lay the foundations for successful academic writing. Students will be introduced to language learning strategies and will develop study skills that are crucial to their success in an English-medium university. Prerequisite: Minimum TOEFL score of 65 (internet based) with a minimum score of 16 in each band, or a score of 5.0 IELTS with a minimum score of 4.5 in each band.
EAP 140 English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 19) (either term, variable). Provides students with the opportunity to improve their academic listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Upon completion of EAP 140, students are able to engage in short academic activities, including essay writing, reading short texts, and listening to and participating in short lectures and discussions. Prerequisites: EAP 135 or minimum TOEFL scores of 70 (internet based) with a minimum score of 17 in each band, or a score of at least 5.5 IELTS with a minimum score of 5.0 in each band.
EAP 145 English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 19) (either term, variable). A continuation of EAP 140. Students further develop their abilities to collect and synthesize information from a variety of academic sources; analyze and critique materials; and present their ideas in accordance with the academic standards found at the first-year university level. EAP 140 and 145 thoroughly prepare students for study at the undergraduate university level. Prerequisite: EAP 140.
EAP 150 English for Academic Purposes Œ3 (fi 19) (either term, variable). Designed to further develop English language skills for students whose first language is not English, EAP 150 will focus on advanced strategies for engaging in reading, writing, listening and speaking activities in university settings. Particular emphasis will be placed on collecting, synthesizing, analyzing, and critiquing materials from a variety of sources, as well as presenting ideas in different academic formats. Prerequisite: upon recommendation of the Fresh Start Advisor.
EAP 550 Preparing for Graduate Studies Œ6 (fi 15) (either term, variable). An intensive course designed to assist students whose first language is not English in attaining the academic and communication skills necessary for them to become effective, independent participants in graduate studies at an English-language university. Course content is interdisciplinary and focuses on acquiring a practical understanding of and proficiency in approaches to critical thinking, research methodologies, and presentation skills. The course also allows for cultural reflection, facilitating the transitional process, and helping international graduate students to succeed in a North American university setting. Prerequisites: EAP 140 or minimum scores of 76 TOEFL iBT or 6.0 IELTS.
#
Entomology (Biological Sciences)
ENT
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Biology (BIOL); Botany (BOT); Genetic (GENET); Microbiology (MICRB); Zoology (ZOOL).
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
ENT 220 Insect Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the evolution, diversity, phylogeny, life styles, distribution, and classification of hexapods and practical experience in their identification. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100.
ENT 222 Insects in Managed Ecosystems Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). An introduction to insects and related arthropods emphasizing aspects of their structure, life history and ecology responsible for their importance as pest or beneficial organisms in managed landscapes. Principles of integrated pest management of insects of importance to Albertan and North American agricultural, horticultural and forested ecosystems will be discussed. Students will gain practical experience in identification of pest and beneficial insects. Prerequisite: Biology 108 or SCI 100. Credit may be obtained for only one of ENT 207, 222 or 380.
ENT 327 Terrestrial Arthropod Diversity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Evolution, distribution, and classification of terrestrial arthropods, with emphasis on hexapods. Students practice identification using museum collections, keys and databases, and make a substantive collection of regional insects. Prerequisite: Any one of ENCS 201, ENT 220, 222, or ZOOL 250. Credit can only be obtained for one of ENT 327, 427 or 527. Offered in alternate years.
ENT 378 Insect Pathology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the diseases of insects and related arthropods. The use of insect pathogens to reduce pest damage in forestry and agriculture. Roles of diseases in insect population dynamics, Biotechnology and insect pathogens. Prerequisite: *3 in Entomology or Microbiology. Not open to first-year students.
ENT 392 Medical and Veterinary Entomology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An account of the influence of the arthropods on the health of man and domestic animals, and the interactions between arthropod vectors and vertebrate pathogens. Prerequisite: any Entomology course or consent of instructor.
ENT 401 Current Topics in Arthropod Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Survey, discussion and analysis of current literature in selected areas of arthropod biology of interest to advanced undergraduates. Prerequisite: ZOOL 250 or an ENT course or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in graduate programs in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee: BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415, 520; NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
ENT 501 Advanced Current Topics in Arthropod Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Survey, discussion and analysis of current literature in selected areas of arthropod biology of interest to graduate students in Biological Sciences. Discussions are the same as for ENT 401, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ENT 527 Advanced Terrestrial Arthropod Diversity Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Evolution, distribution, and classification of terrestrial arthropods, with emphasis on hexapods. Students practice identification using museum collections, build keys and databases, and make a substantive collection of regional insects. Lectures and labs are the same as for ENT 327, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Credit can only be obtained for one of ENT 327, 427 or 527. Offered in alternate years.
ENT 601 Entomology Seminar Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-2s-0). A forum for those with an interest in insects. Presentations may be provided by students, faculty, invited speakers and visiting scientists. Credit may be obtained more than once.
ENT 602 Entomology Seminar Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2s-0). Presentations may be provided by students, faculty, invited speakers and visiting scientists. Each student enrolled for credit gives one seminar for evaluation. Questions and discussion follow; participation also requires written evaluations of each seminar by peers and one or more Faculty members.
#
Environmental and Conservation Sciences
ENCS
Departments of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science; Renewable Resources; Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural and Resource Economics (AREC), Animal Science (ANSC), Forest Economics (FOREC), Plant Science (PL SC), Renewable Resources (REN R), and Soil Science (SOILS) listings for related courses.
The following courses were renumbered
Old New
ENCS 201 REN R 205
ENCS 207 REN R 299
ENCS 260 REN R 260
ENCS 271 REN R 271
ENCS 307 REN R 307
ENCS 360 REN R 360
ENCS 364 REN R 364
ENCS 376 REN R 376
ENCS 455 REN R 482
ENCS 461 REN R 446
ENCS 462 REN R 462
ENCS 464 REN R 464
ENCS 465 REN R 465
ENCS 467 REN R 467
ENCS 474 REN R 474
ENCS 475 REN R 483
ENCS 476 REN R 476
ENCS 510 REN R 511
Undergraduate Courses
ENCS 352 Natural Resource and Environmental Law Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Overview of Canadian laws and policies designed to control air, land, and water pollution including licensing systems, quasi-criminal sanctions, and environmental impact assessment processes. The course will also review relevant constitutional issues and consider alternative legal approaches to the resolution of environmental problems. Prerequisite: Completion of *60 of university- level course work. [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology].
ENCS 356 Principles of Rangeland Conservation and Habitat Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An introduction to rangeland conservation and wildlife habitat management. Examines the effects of grazing and browsing on ecosystems components, including rangeland soils, plants, plant communities, and landscapes. Discusses interactions among herbivores including livestock and wildlife. Reviews practical management activities such as rangeland inventory, improvements, planning, and condition assessment. Prerequisite: *3 in university-level biology. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science]
ENCS 406 Rangeland Plant Communities of Western Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Examines major rangeland plant communities and their physical environments in western Canada, including individual plant identification and ecology. Includes a review of various land uses such as livestock and wildlife grazing within these communities, their response to disturbances such as herbivory and fire, and other management considerations. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 506). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 506 and ENCS 406. Prerequisite: one of ENCS 356, REN R 120 or BOT 210; ENCS 356 strongly recommended. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science ]
ENCS 407 Rangeland Plant Communities of North America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 1-0-5). An in-depth study of the plants and communities of North American rangelands and wildland ecosystems, and their management. Prerequisites: ENCS 356; ENCS 406 strongly recommended. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science]
ENCS 471 Practical Case Studies in Rangeland Management and Conservation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Cumulative effects of fire, grazing, browsing, and improvement practices on the productivity and species composition of range and pasture ecosystems, including management implications. Extended field trip prior to the start of classes. Offered in odd-numbered years. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 572). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 572 and ENCS 471. Prerequisite: ENCS 356. ENCS 406 strongly recommended. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science]
ENCS 473 Environmental and Conservation Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of principles and programs relating to environmental and conservation policy. Selected local, national, and international environmental policy issues. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, FOREC 345, AREC 365, ECON 365, ECON 369. Credit will only be given for one of ENCS 473 and ECON 467. [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology].
Graduate Courses
ENCS 673 Environmental and Conservation Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of principles and programs relating to environmental and conservation policy. Selected local, national, and international environmental policy issues. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, FOREC 345, INT D 365, AREC 365, ECON 365, INT D 369, ECON 369. Not available for students with credit in ENCS 473. Available only to students in MBA/MAg, MBA/ MF, MBA in Natural Resource and Energy Programs, or by consent of Department. [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology].
#
Environmental Engineering
ENV E
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Faculty of Engineering
The following course was renumbered effective 2012-2013:
Old New
ENV E 323 ENV E 423
The following courses were renumbered effective 2015-2016:
Old New
ENV E 222 ENV E 325
ENV E 351 ENV E 251
Undergraduate Courses
ENV E 220 Environmental Chemistry for Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Survey of basic principles in analytical, inorganic, and organic chemistry with emphasis on environmental engineering applications. Laboratory measurements related to water quality. Prerequisite: CHEM 105.
ENV E 251 Properties of Environmental Engineering Materials Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Study of materials used in environmental engineering including traditional engineering materials such as soil and rock, concrete, steel, and wood but extending the coverage to man made materials such as plastics, textiles, membranes, composites, resins, and polymers. Prerequisite: EAS 210 and CIV E 270. Corequisite: STAT 235. Credit cannot be obtained for both ENV E 351 ad ENV E 251.
ENV E 302 Environmental Impact Assessment Œ2.5 (fi 8) (either term, 2-1s-0). Need and objectives of environmental impact assessment (EIA). Basic tasks and methods for need justification, project description, environmental factor determination, impact prediction, significance testing, mitigation design, evaluation, reporting, and public review. Review of impacts of different types of engineering projects and activities. Corequisite: ENV E 325.
ENV E 320 Environmental Hydrology Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Introduction to concepts in hydrology and hydrogeology. Hydrology topics include precipitation, evaporation, infiltration, streamflow, and hydrograph analysis. Hydrogeology topics include infiltration, percolation, seepage, drainage, aquifer hydraulics, and urban runoff quality. Prerequisite: CIV E 330; Corequisite: CIV E 331.
ENV E 322 Environmental Protection Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles and methods of environmental and public health protection for the engineering profession. Assessment of behaviour of pollutants in the environment, framework for environmental health risk management and standards in practice such as federal and provincial environment legislation. Environmental policies and their effects on engineering design. Environmental management plans and issues. Prerequisite: ENV E 220.
ENV E 324 Biological Processes Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). The principles and applications of biological processes in the treatment of contaminated environmental media, with a focus on wastewater treatment. Includes knowledge of environmental microbiology necessary to understand biological processes. Prerequisite: ENV E 220.
ENV E 325 Chemical and Physical Processes Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Theory of chemical and physical processes and their application in environmental engineering. Prerequisite: ENV E 220. Corequisites: CIV E 290 or STAT 235, CIV E 295, CIV E 330. Credit cannot be obtained for both ENV E 222 and ENV E 325.
ENV E 400 Advanced Environmental Engineering I Œ3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-0). Industrial waste management, or hazardous waste management, or air pollution, or soil/groundwater pollution, etc. Prerequisite: ENV E 325; corequisite: ENV E 322.
ENV E 401 Advanced Environmental Engineering II Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of advanced treatment processes in air, water and solid systems. Will include development of membrane biological reactor designs, advanced oxidation processes, soil/sediment and hazardous waste remediation techniques, odour reduction and leachate treatment processes. Prerequisite: ENV E 324.
ENV E 421 Municipal Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Detailed and advanced design of water supply systems, sewerage, and storm drains. Rates of flow and hydraulics of networks and sewers, rainfall-runoff analysis, storm water storage, and loads on conduits. Extensive computer simulation of systems. Prerequisites: CIV E 331.
ENV E 423 Principles of Air Quality Management and Control Œ3 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-0). A first course on air quality and air pollution, dealing with: types of gaseous and particulate pollutants and their sources, effects of air pollution on man, vegetation, and materials, indoor air pollution, sampling and analysis of air pollutants, air pollution meteorology and dispersion, control techniques for gaseous and particulate pollutants, and air quality management aspects. Prerequisite: ENV E 325. Credit cannot be obtained for both ENV E 323 and ENV E 423.
ENV E 432 Solid Waste Management Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of solid waste management to protect public health. Study of solid waste components, refuse collection, storage, and handling. Design and operation of solid waste transfer and disposal facilities including transfer stations, resource recovery and composting facilities, incinerators, and landfills. Prerequisites: ENV E 324 and 351.
ENV E 434 Environmental Geotechnics Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Design of soil waste containment systems; stability of natural slopes, engineered cuts and embankments; earth pressure theories; design of retaining structures and pressures on buried pipes; settlement of earth containment structures and foundations; load-carrying capacity of foundations; design for filtration, separation, containment, and reinforcement using geosynthetics. Prerequisites: CIV E 381 and ENV E 251.
ENV E 440 Facility Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3). Design of water supply, water treatment, wastewater treatment, or sewerage and storm water management facilities. Course includes major design projects, field trips, and presentations. Students work in teams on a design project. Prerequisites: ENV E 324 and 421. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
#
Exchange Program
EXCH
Education Abroad Program
Examinations and Timetabling
Undergraduate Courses
EXCH 800 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 60) (two term, unassigned).
EXCH 801 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 30) (either term, unassigned).
EXCH 810 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 24) (Spring/Summer, unassigned).
EXCH 811 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned).
EXCH 812 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned).
EXCH 813 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 18) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned).
Graduate Courses
EXCH 802 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned).
EXCH 803 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned).
EXCH 804 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 18) (either term, unassigned).
EXCH 805 Exchange Program Œ0 (fi 24) (either term, unassigned).
#
Extension
EXT
Faculty of Extension
Undergraduate Courses
EXT 300 Education Abroad: Global Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). Gaining an awareness of one’s own cultural perspectives and beliefs enables the development of intercultural understanding and competencies. By focusing on intercultural principles and practices, students engaged in educational and experiential experiences abroad will: explore the concept of culture and cultural variations; develop awareness of how their own culture influences values, beliefs, and actions: gain an understanding of the core intercultural competencies: acquire competencies and skills critical for studying, working, and living globally. Course is delivered asynchronously online and is intended for students participating in an education abroad or study abroad experience. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
EXT 497 Current Topics in Community, Urban and Regional Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-2s-1). Treating the city as classroom, and using discussions and presentations, current urban and regional issues will be surveyed. This course offers advanced preparation in the socioeconomic, cultural and planning aspects of communities and environments. Prerequisite: social science background or consent of instructor.
Graduate Courses
EXT 541 CBRE Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). Students will participate in a supervised field experience and demonstrate the integration of concepts, principles and approaches learned in INT D 500 Introduction to Community-Based Research and valuation. Students will prepare a knowledge-sharing activity appropriate to the field experience setting. Normally students will be expected to complete all of their CBRE Graduate Certificate course requirements prior to enrolling in EXT 541. Open to students in the CBRE Graduate Certificate only.
EXT 597 Current Topics in Community, Urban and Regional Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-2s-1). Treating the city as classroom, and using discussions and presentations, current urban and regional issues will be surveyed. This course offers advanced preparation in the socioeconomic, cultural and planning aspects of communities and environments. Prerequisite: social science background or consent of instructor.
#
Family Medicine
F MED
Department of Family Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Notes
(1) Family Medicine is included in MED 516, 526, 527, 532, 546, and 547 and DMED 511.
(2) The Department of Family Medicine is responsible for the Human Sexuality component of MED 526 offered within the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry.
Undergraduate Courses
F MED 546 Family Medicine Student Internship Œ8 (fi 16) (either term, 8 weeks). Student internship in Family Medicine for students registered in the MD program.
#
Film Studies
FS
Department of English and Film Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
FS 100 Introduction to Film Study =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Introduction to basic formal concepts in film analysis including mise-en-scène, cinematographic properties, editing, and sound, as well as narrative qualities.
FS 201 Introduction to Film History I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A survey of world cinema from 1890 to 1950, with emphasis on major historical developments and important individual films. Prerequisite or corequisite: FS 100. Not to be taken by students with credit in FS 200.
FS 202 Introduction to Film History II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A survey of world cinema from 1950 to present, with emphasis on major historical developments and important individual films. Prerequisite: FS 100. Prerequisite or corequisite: FS 201. Not to be taken by students with credit in FS 200.
FS 203 Television from Broadcasting to Screen Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The socio-cultural role of TV from the network to multi-platform eras with an emphasis on theories of power and representation. Prerequisite/Corequisite: FS 100.
FS 215 Introduction to Film Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). General survey of major currents and debates in film theory, including early theories on the ontology of the film image, semiotic approaches to film as language, Marxist and psychoanalytic concepts of spectatorship and the film image, the intersections of film and ideology, and the phenomenological theory of film as an embodied experience. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 309 Quebec Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). History and aesthetic developments in Quebec film, from 1930s to present. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 310 English-Canadian Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Major trends in English Canadian film, such as documentary, feature film, animation, and experimental film. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 313 Transnational Crime Cinema Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examining the ways in which crime and criminality have been represented in narrative cinema across cultures and nationalities. Prerequisite: FS 100
FS 315 The Western Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Survey of the cinematic Western from the silent period to the present, with emphasis on the decades between 1930 and 1970. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 317 The Gangster Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Survey of the Hollywood gangster film and related forms from the 1930s to the present. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 318 Science Fiction Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A study of the Science Fiction film genre as an imaginative displacement of social and cultural concerns that define the context in which the films emerge. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 319 Film Noir Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A study of the stylistic, thematic, and ideological features of the American film genre known as film noir. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 320 The French New Wave Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examines the aesthetic, cultural and political principles animating the films of the 1960s cinematic movement known as the French New Wave. Prerequisite: FS 100. Not to be taken by students with credit in FS 362.
FS 321 Animation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An overview of the development of the animated film in a global context. Production practices may include pin screen, cell, clay, collage, stop-motion, and computer animation. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 322 Gender and Sexuality in Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Intersections between film and cultural notions and practices of gender and sexuality. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 323 Screening Comedy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examines the history of comedy across cinema, television, and digital platforms, drawing on theories of humor and laughter. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 324 Monsters, Slashers and Ghosts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Examines the horror genre from the silent era to the present. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 330 Documentary Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Theory and history of the documentary film, with emphasis on Flaherty, the Documentary Movement in Britain, the National Film Board of Canada, and recent developments in the field. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 331 Silent Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An investigation of silent film treated as a form distinct from sound film. Historical developments, important genres and major individual films with emphasis on American and European film. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 333 Experimental Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Avant-garde, abstract and structural film. The history and changing conceptions of experimental film, with examples from the silent era to the present. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 340 Making Television: Production Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the cultural and industrial dimensions of televisual production and distribution into the post-network era. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 341 Television Genres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of specific genres within their cultural, historical, and industrial contexts. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 365 French Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An overview of the development of French cinema from the beginning of cinema to the present including major film movements such as Surrealism, Poetic Realism, Cinema Verité, the Nouvelle Vague, and contemporary movements. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 368 Central and East-European Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Historical and aesthetic developments in the cinemas of the Czech Republic, Poland, and Hungary from the early years of cinema to the post-1989 period. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 369 East Asian Cinema Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of East Asian cinemas such as mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan, and South Korea. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 371 Contemporary Hollywood Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Concentrates on commercial American filmmaking since the 1960s. Special attention will be given to defining Postmodernism and to historically situating its rise within the development of American cinema. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 386 Screening Race Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines representations of race, ethnicity, and identity on screen with an emphasis on critical race theories. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 387 Film and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An examination of how technology influences the patterns of film production. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 399 Special Topics in Film Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 410 Topics in Filmmakers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). Concentrated study of the works of individual filmmakers. The course will deal with one to three important filmmakers through representative films. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 412 Topics in Film Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A seminar-based examination of specialized topics in film. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 415 Global Television and Screen Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Transnational flows of popular entertainment and their relationship to local and global cultural identities. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 416 Analyzing Television Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Critical studies of televisual narratives, ideologies, discourses, and audience reception practices. Prerequisite: FS 100.
FS 480 Directed Reading in Film Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
FS 521 Directed Reading Course I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
FS 522 Directed Reading Course II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Finance
FIN
Department of Finance and Statistical Analysis Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all FIN courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
FIN 301 Introduction to Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Types of securities and basic methods of valuation. Valuation and selection of physical and intellectual assets. Operation of asset markets and market efficiency. Risk measures and risk reduction methods. Financing policy, including choices between debt and equity financing. Note: Students are expected to have basic familiarity with microcomputer applications. Prerequisite: STAT 151, SCI 151 or equivalent. Pre- or corequisite: MGTSC 312, ACCTG 300 or 311.
FIN 412 Investment Principles Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines securities and securities markets with emphasis on stocks and bonds. Topics include information, interest rates, risk-return relationships, efficient markets, diversification, portfolio performance measurement, and the application of financial theory to investment decisions. Prerequisite: FIN 301 and MGTSC 312. Students may not receive credit for both FIN 412 and ECON 442.
FIN 413 Risk Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the markets and valuation models for options and future contracts, and their application to hedging and the valuation of the other financial contracts. Prerequisite: FIN 301.
FIN 414 Operation of Financial Institutions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Well-functioning capital markets are essential for economic growth. The allocation of scarce resources requires accurate prices and this includes accurate prices for investment capital (i.e., the cost of capital). This course examines the roles played by various financial intermediaries as they engage in activities that enhance the functionality of capital markets, the risks faced as they do so, and the ways that these risks are managed. At the end of this course you should understand the economic role of financial intermediaries in general, the risks faced by specific types of financial intermediaries as they fulfill their roles, and techniques for measuring and managing the risks. Success in this course requires a sound grasp of business fundamentals, critical thinking and problem solving, communication skills, and the application of quantitative methods. Prerequisite: FIN 301. Students may not receive credit for both FIN 414 and ECON 341.
FIN 416 Advanced Portfolio Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Recent theoretical and empirical developments in portfolio management are covered with an emphasis on investment strategy and the evaluation of investment performance. A student project makes extensive use of microcomputing, spreadsheets and financial market data. Prerequisite: FIN 301, 412.
FIN 418 Fixed Income Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The valuation and management of interest-rate contracts. The main focus is on the behaviour of bond portfolios and related risk-management techniques. The institutional features of North American fixed- income markets complete the course. Prerequisites: FIN 301, 412.
FIN 422 Capital Investment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Capital budgeting and the determination of the cost of capital to the firm. Prerequisite: FIN 301 and MGTSC 312.
FIN 430 Corporate Financial Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced discussion of valuation and financial policies. Prerequisites: FIN 301, 412, and 422.
FIN 434 Advanced Corporate Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers selected advanced topics in corporate finance, including corporate governance, mergers and acquisitions, capital structure, financial history, behavioral finance, and comparative financial system. The frontiers between finance and economics, history, political science, and psychology are explored. Topics may vary from year to year in response to current events. Prerequisite: FIN 301 and MGTSC 312.
FIN 436 Investment Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides students with experience managing an institutional asset portfolio, the PRIME FUND. Students interact with investment professionals in making asset acquisition and divesture decisions within the institutional framework of the fund. This course draws on and unifies skills related to investment analysis and portfolio theory. It combines traditional academic objectives with the practical demands of hands-on investment analysis and portfolio management. The students learn by actually using the tools of the trade. These include printed materials, real-time computerized sources of information and, most importantly, access to practising analysts and managers. Students also learn about the differences between institutional and personal investment decisions, the mechanics of trading, the different providers of trading services, and cash management. Prerequisites: FIN 412, 416. Open only to students with the consent of the Department.
FIN 442 International Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the international financial environment and the financial function in the multinational corporation. Its purpose is to provide decision-making skills in international money and capital markets. Prerequisite: FIN 301.
FIN 480 Honours Essay in Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Preparation of the honours essay required for students in the Finance Honours program. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
FIN 488 Selected Topics in Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites: FIN 301 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
FIN 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
FIN 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: FIN 495, consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
FIN 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: FIN 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
FIN 501 Managerial Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental concepts in asset valuation are discussed within the context of simple asset pricing models and efficient financial markets. This course introduces the valuation of financial assets such as bonds and stocks. Further topics include the issuing of financial securities, leverage, dividend policy, cash management, and derivative securities. Credit will not be given for FIN 501 when FIN 503 has been completed. Prerequisites: ACCTG 501, BUEC 503, and MGTSC 501.
FIN 502 Introduction to Financial Valuation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental concepts in asset valuation are discussed in the context of simple asset pricing models. This course introduces the valuation of financial assets such as bonds and stocks. The concept of Net Present Value in capital investments is also introduced, along with basic financial planning. Other topics include an introduction to Markowitz diversification, the Capital Asset Pricing Model, and basic cost of capital estimation. Not open to students who have completed FIN 501. Corequisites: ACCTG 501, BUEC 503, MGTSC 501. FIN 502 must be taken as part of a FIN 502, FIN 503 sequence.
FIN 503 Introduction to Corporate Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamental concepts in the modern theory of corporate finance are discussed. This course introduces dividend policy, capital structure, cost of capital and its relation to leverage, and an advanced treatment of capital investments. An introduction to derivatives payoffs and valuation concludes the course. Not open to students who have completed FIN 501. Prerequisite: FIN 502.
FIN 601 Introduction to Financial Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce the perspective, required knowledge, skills, and context for the position of Chief Financial Officer. Ethical aspects of business situations and relationships will also be addressed.
FIN 604 The Practice of Investment Banking Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with the organization, evolution and structure of, and functions performed by, investment banks. Specifically, the course will cover topics such as the offering of securities to the public, the underwriting process, normal course and short form prospectus offerings, and private placements. In addition, exchange listings, maintaining exchange trading status, the role of research analysts and insider trading regulation will be studied. Co-requisite: FIN 501 or FIN 503.
FIN 614 Investments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with investment in stocks, bonds and other financial assets. Topics include, but are not limited to, interest rates, risk-return relationships, investment valuation, and market information and efficiency. Prerequisite: FIN 501 or Co-requisite: FIN 503.
FIN 615 Trading and Financial Markets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will discuss the functioning of global financial markets and trading and price determination in these markets. Topics covered will include order submission and trading strategies, market structure, transaction cost and liquidity measurement, price formation, and technical analysis. The lectures will draw on academic and practitioner research as well as information from financial markets. Prerequisite: FIN 503. It is recommended the student have credit in FIN 614.
FIN 616 Securities Markets and Financial Intermediation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Well-functioning capital markets are essential for economic growth. The allocation of scarce resources requires accurate prices and this includes accurate prices for investment capital (i.e. the cost of capital). This course examines the roles played by various financial intermediaries as they engage in activities that enhance the functionality of capital markets, the risks faced as they do so, and the ways that these risks are managed. At the end of this course you should understand the economic role of financial intermediaries in general, the risks faced by specific types of financial intermediaries as they fulfill their roles, and techniques for measuring and managing these risks. Success in this course requires a sound grasp of business fundamentals, critical thinking and problem solving, communication skills, and the application of quantitative methods. Prerequisite: FIN 501 or 503.
FIN 618 Fixed Income Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers markets for interest rate-paying securities. The valuation of such securities will be covered, as will tools and techniques for the management of interest rate risk. This will include a discussion of the pricing and uses of various interest rate derivative securities, such as swaps, options on swaps (“swaptions”), futures, and forward rate agreements. Further, aspects of the underwriting process, of interest to potential issuers of such securities, will be discussed. Prerequisite: FIN 601 or FIN 501 or FIN 503.
FIN 625 Finance in Professional Accounting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intended for students pursuing the CPA designation, this course looks at derivatives, hedging and risk management. Open to students enrolled in the MAcc program only.
FIN 634 Corporate Financial Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced discussion of asset choice and financial structure. Supplemental case study. Prerequisite: FIN 503.
FIN 635 Venture Capital Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers the theory and practice of venture capital financing of entrepreneurial firms. Topics to be discussed include, but are not limited to, the following areas: venture capital fundraising (labour-sponsored venture capital corporations, limited partnerships and corporate venture capital) characteristics of entrepreneurial ventures (including agency problems, firm valuation) at different stages of development (seed, start-up, expansion, mezzanine, buyout, turnaround), the structure of venture capital financial contracts (staging, syndication, forms of finance), restrictive covenants, investment duration, and venture capital exits (IPOs, acquisitions, secondary sales, buybacks, write-offs). Prerequisite: FIN 501 or 503.
FIN 644 International Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of this course is to acquaint students with macro and micro aspects of international finance. At the macro level coverage will include theories of direct investment, the international monetary mechanism, foreign exchange markets, and repercussions from balance of payments difficulties. Micro level materials will include problems of doing business internationally and a survey of public and private foreign and international finance institutions. The final part of the course will review Canada’s role in international business. Prerequisite: FIN 501 or 503.
FIN 654 Risk Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Futures, options, and other derivative securities. Markets, valuation models, application to risk management through hedging, and the application of pricing models to the valuation of financial contracts. Prerequisite: FIN 503. It is recommended the student have credit in FIN 614.
FIN 673 Mergers, Restructuring, and Corporate Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Financial and economic aspects of corporate mergers, restructuring, downsizing, and bankruptcy are examined. Relations between corporate structure and performance are investigated. Specific attention is paid to the roles of top management and boards of directors. Special issues relating to privatization and restructuring in former socialist economies are studied. Prerequisite: FIN 503.
FIN 680 Strategic Financial Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Combination of comprehensive global financial management cases from the CFO perspective and presentations and discussions on current financial management topics including lectures from CFOs and others with significant expertise in global financial market and institutions. Prerequisites: FIN 601 or FIN 503; and FIN 614 and FIN 654.
FIN 686 Selected Topics in Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
FIN 701 Advanced Seminar in Finance I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an introduction to theoretical and empirical work in asset pricing and market microstructure. Topics covered include market efficiency, time varying expected returns and volatility, tests of asset pricing models, and models and analysis of price formation. Prerequisite: Open to doctoral students in the Faculty of Business, the Department of Economics and the Program of Mathematical Finance. For all other students, written permission of instructor required. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
FIN 702 Advanced Seminar in Finance II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to theoretical and empirical research in corporate finance. Potential topics include contracting theory, the theory of the firm, corporate governance, capital structure, and dividend policy. Prerequisite: Open to doctoral students in the Faculty of Business, the Department of Economics and the Program of Mathematical Finance. For all other students, written permission of instructor required. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
FIN 703 Advanced Seminar in Finance III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides advanced mathematical coverage of important topics in finance. Potential topics include continuous-time models of asset pricing and portfolio choice, pricing and hedging of derivative securities, and the applications of contingent claim pricing models to the valuation of real assets and corporate liabilities. Prerequisite: Open to doctoral students in the Faculty of Business, the Department of Economics and the Program of Mathematical Finance. For all other students, written permission of instructor required. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
FIN 704 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
FIN 705 Research Seminar in Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). This seminar is a single-term course offered over two terms. Members of the faculty and visiting speakers will often present their research. Advanced students are expected to present original work related to their doctoral theses. Other students will discuss and critique papers on the frontiers of current research. Pre- or corequisites: FIN 701, 702, and 703. Open to doctoral students in the Faculty of Business, the Department of Economics and the Program of Mathematical Finance. For all other students, written permission of instructor required. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
FIN 815 Financial Analysis and Decision Making Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 1 week). A week-long intensive course. Understanding cash flow analysis, short-term financing, pro formas, the assessment of financial performance, ratio analysis and the role of financial intermediaries. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
FIN 830 Finance Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding valuation, capital markets, venture capital, international markets, and corporate risk management. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
#
Forest Economics
FOREC
Department of Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural and Resource Economics (AREC), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Courses (INT D), and Rural Sociology (R SOC) listings for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
Note: See also INT D 565 for courses which are offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
FOREC 345 Economics of Forestry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Economic aspects of forest production, marketing, finance, and policy. Prerequisite: ECON 101.
FOREC 473 Forest Policy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Analysis of forest resource policy formation and evaluation. Review of selected policies and programs provincially, nationally, and internationally. Analysis of current policy issues. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, FOREC 345, INT D 365, AREC 365, ECON 365, INT D 369, ECON 269. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Renewable Resources and Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology). [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology]
Graduate Courses
Note: Undergraduate course may be taken for credit by Graduate Students in Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology: FOREC 473.
FOREC 500 Research Projects in Forest Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study. Investigations of a special problem involving field or library study and preparation of written reports. Prerequisite: consent of Department Chair.
FOREC 600 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of selected research problems and design or research projects in forest economics. Prerequisite: consent of Department Chair.
FOREC 673 Forest Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of forest resource policy formation and evaluation. Review of selected policies and programs provincially, nationally, and internationally. Analysis of current policy issues. Prerequisite: One of the following: AREC 200, FOREC 345, INT D 365 or AREC 365, INT D 369, ECON 369. Not available for students with credit in FOREC 473. Available only to students in MBA/ MAg, MBA/MF, MBA in Natural Resource and Energy Programs, or by consent of Department. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Renewable Resources and Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology (REES).) [REES]
#
French Language and Literature
FREN
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a French language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316 pursue mastery of the language and introduce students to the study of texts (e.g., literary, journalistic, cinematographic). The double focus allows for applied language development while providing an in-depth introduction to the study of major cultural texts.
(5) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS).
Undergraduate Courses
FREN 111 Beginners’ French I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Designed for students with little or no previous background in French. Covers material in matriculation-level French and allows students to proceed into the study of French at the University level. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with French 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
FREN 112 Beginners’ French II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with French 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
FREN 211 Intermediate French I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Spoken and written French, including grammar, composition, and literature. Prerequisite: French 30 (or equivalent) or FREN 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 150.
FREN 212 Intermediate French II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 150.
FREN 254 Introduction to Translation Theory and Practice: French- English-French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 297. This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
FREN 297 Advanced French I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Designed to improve the student’s command of French through intensive oral practice and advanced written exercises. Prerequisite: FREN 212 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 251, 252 or FRANC 165, 166, 210, 211.
FREN 298 Advanced French II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Emphasis on the improvement of writing and speaking skills by means of numerous compositions based on texts read and discussed in class. Prerequisite: FREN 297 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 252 or FRANC 165, 166, 210, 211.
FREN 301 Introduction to French Literary Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tools necessary to conduct literary analyses and essay writing. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 310 Composition, Style and Expression Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 298 or consent of Department. Not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 352.
FREN 311 Mystery, Myth, and Supernatural Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mythology, the supernatural, superstition as cultural and literary phenomena in the French-speaking world. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 312 Colonialism and Postcolonialism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Francophone cultural texts from a post/colonial perspective, the socio-historical contexts of their production and their importance for definitions of cultural identity. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 313 Passions/Obsessions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Two loosely connected themes that go back to the very origins of French as a language and continue to shape cultural expression in it. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 314 Beauty/Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses either a given period or a particular facet of aesthetics. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 315 Cultural Representations of Food Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Functions and manifestations of the food paradigm in Francophone cinematographic and narrative texts. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 316 Belonging (Migration and Identity) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Place and community; identity, belonging, exile. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 333 French Cultural Moments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Uses the study of various intellectual and historical events to provide students with a window into the French world. Prerequisite: FREN 297 or consent of Department. Offered in La Rochelle, France only. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
FREN 354 Translation: French into English =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 254 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in FREN 353. This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
FREN 371 Language and Francophone Societies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the French language as it has evolved chronologically and geographically. Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 372 French Phonetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the pronunciation of Standard French. Prerequisite: FREN 298 or consent of Department.
FREN 399 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 298.
FREN 445 Contemporary Cinema in French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on the representation and evolution of society in French cinema of the last 20 years. Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 454 Translation: English into French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: FREN 354 or consent of Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
FREN 462 Topics in Medieval and Early Modern Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 463 Topics in Nineteenth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 464 Topics in Twentieth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 465 Caribbean Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Colonialism, identity, diaspora and cultural diversity in French Caribbean literature, films, and music. Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 467 Women Writing in French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Texts written in various Francophone parts of the world from different periods. Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 468 Topics in Quebec/French Canadian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225, and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 481 Topics in Folklore and Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of French oral, materials, and popular culture in various parts of the Francophone world. Variable content; may be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: FREN 301 or FRANC 225; and one of FREN 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 333.
FREN 495 Honors Thesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
FREN 499 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
FREN 545 Contemporary Cinema in French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 554 Translation: English into French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 563 Topics in Nineteenth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 564 Topics in Twentieth-Century Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 565 Caribbean Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 567 Women Writing in French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 568 Topics in Québec/French Canadian Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 576 Linguistics Applied to French Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
FREN 599 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
FREN 699 Topics in French Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
FSJ - Administration
ADMI
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ADMI 301 Fondements légaux de l’économie canadienne Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude synoptique du système légal canadien, mettant l’accent sur les considérations sous-jacentes de politique sociale. Tout en considérant la nature, les sources, et la philosophie du droit, ainsi que les objectifs des politiques qu’il codifie, des sujets choisis dans les champs de la responsabilité civile délictuelle et contractuelle seront analysés. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour B LAW 301.
ADMI 302 Introduction à la finance Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-0). Différents types de titres boursiers et méthodes d’évaluation de base. Évaluation et sélection d’actifs matériels et intellectuels. Fonctionnement et efficience des marchés financiers. Mesures de risque et méthode de réduction du risque. Politique de financement, incluant le choix entre l’endettement et les fonds propres. Note: On s’attend à ce que les étudiants soient familiers avec les logiciels informatiques de base. Préalable(s): STAT 151 ou équivalent. Autres cours préalable(s) ou concomitant(s): MGTSC 312, ACCTG 300 ou ACCTG 311.
ADMI 311 Introduction à la comptabilité =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1.5s-0). Postulats, principes, cycle comptable, calcul du capital et du revenu, préparation et analyse d’un état financier, instance sur les rapports à présenter aux actionnaires et autres agents externes détenant des pouvoirs de décision. Préalable(s): ECONE 101/102. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ACCTG 311.
ADMI 322 Gestion et méthodes de contrôle =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Objectifs d’une entreprise, concepts de planification et de contrôle, accumulation des coûts en vue de l’établissement des prix et de l’évaluation du prix de revient des produits. Préalable(s): ADMI 311 ou ACCTG 311. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ACCTG 322.
ADMI 342 Introduction au Commerce International Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux outils requis pour réussir dans un monde des affaires de plus en plus international. Sert de tremplin à des cours plus avancés en affaires internationales. Les sujets couverts incluent les différences entre les pays, le commerce international, l´investissement direct étranger, l´intégration économique internationale, le marché des changes, et la stratégie et les opérations en affaires internationales. Note : Ce cours n´est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour BUEC 342.
ADMI 479 L’entreprise et le gouvernement au Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse de l’interaction entre l’entreprise et l’administration publique. On s’intéresse en particulier à la dynamique d’ajustement de la firme et du gouvernement dans les changements d’environnement et de politiques. Les motivations et comportements des décideurs publics et des personnes responsables de l’application des mesures sont présentés dans le contexte d’interaction entre les différents groupes impliqués. Sont posées les bases d’une analyse de l’efficacité des différentes politiques, tant fiscales que réglementaires, visant la firme. On y aborde aussi les conséquences des changements de l’environnement économique, technologique et social pour la firme. Préalable(s): ECONE 281 ou BUEC 311. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour BUEC 479.
#
FSJ - Anatomie
ANATE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ANATE 140 Anatomie Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux structures du corps humain. Doit être complété avant l’année 2 du BScInf (bilingue). Notes: La priorité sera accordée aux étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour NURS 140.
ANATE 200 Morphologie Humaine Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’anatomie du corps humain. Le cours traite de l’anatomie macroscopique et microscopique des tissus, organes et des systèmes du corps humain, en mettant l’accent sur les relations, les interactions et les fonctions des structures majeures. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ANATE 140, ANAT 200, ou NURS 140.
ANATE 409 Histologie Humaine Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 2-0-1). Ce cours d’introduction à l’histologie mettra l’accent sur la reconnaissance et l’identification de la structure et de l’organisation cellulaire associée à la physiologie normale des divers tissus et organes du corps humain. Ce cours comportera une part égale de cours théoriques et de laboratoires étant donné qu’il est essentiel d’acquérir et développer le sens de l’observation nécessaire à l’étude de l’histologie. Ce cours devrait permettre une compréhension de la relation étroite entre l’histologie, la physiologie et la pratique médicale. Préalables: BIOLE 201, PHYSE 210, ou PHYSL 210, ou PHYSL 212 et 214, ou ZOOL 241 et 242.
#
FSJ - Anglais
ANGL
Faculté Saint-Jean
Notes
(1) Only one *6 or two *3 courses at the 100 level can be credited to the BA program.
(2) Prerequisite for 200, 300, and 400 level courses is *6 of junior level English/ Anglais.
(3) *6 of junior level English/Anglais can include ANGL 111 (*6) or ANGL 113 (*6), or ANGL 122 (*3) and ANGL 126 (*3),
(4) ANGL 102 was previously the final course in the series of Anglais langue seconde courses (ALS). It does not qualify for credit toward the required *6 of junior level English/Anglais. (see Compulsory Test for Students Admitted without English 30 or Equivalent and notes Course Listings).
(5) ANGL 102 is now called ALS 125. The course remains the same.
Cours de 1er cycle
ANGL 122 Texts and Contexts =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores a specific issue using a variety of genres and media. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English/Anglais including ANGL 101, 111, 113. Prerequisite: English Language Arts 30-1 or ANGL 102 or ALS 125 or equivalent.
ANGL 123 Language, Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the literary and cultural uses of language. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English/Anglais including ANGL 101, 111 or 113. Prerequisite: English Language Arts 30-1 or ANGL 102 or ALS 125 or equivalent.
ANGL 124 English Literature in Global Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in the literatures of the English-speaking world. Not to be taken by students with *6 in approved junior English/Anglais including ANGL 101, 111 or 113. Prerequisite: English Language Arts 30-1 or ANGL 102 or ALS 125 or equivalent.
ANGL 126 Exploring Writing Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This workshop course focuses on both the theory and practice of the writing process to help students experience firsthand how university writers enter into rich ongoing conversations by engaging with the words and ideas of others. Prerequisite: English Language Arts 30-1 or ANGL 102 or ALS 125 or equivalent. Note: Not to be taken by students with credits in WRS 101.
#
FSJ - Anglais langue seconde
ALS
Faculté Saint-Jean
Notes
(1) La série de cours d’Anglais langue seconde sont: ALS 105, 110, 115, 120 et ALS 125.
(2) Les cours ALS 105, 110, 115, et ALS 125 se destinent aux étudiants qui ne disposent pas de la base nécessaire pour satisfaire aux exigences des cours ANGL 111, 113, 122 et ANGL 126.
(3) Affectation par test de placement obligatoire (voir Compulsory Test for Students Admitted Without English 30 or Equivalen) pour tous les cours ALS 105, 110, 115, 120 et ALS 125.
Cours de 1er cycle
ALS 105 Niveau élémentaire 1 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Étude des éléments et des structures de base de l’anglais parlé et écrit. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ANGL 113, ESL ou EAP 140, 145, 150, ALS 100, 110, 115, 120, 125, 160, ANGL 102 ou leurs équivalents. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire. Veuillez consulter l’article « Test obligatoire pour les étudiants ne présentant pas English 30 ou l’équivalent » dans la section de Faculté Saint-Jean de l’annuaire.
ALS 110 Niveau élémentaire 2 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Étude des éléments et des structures de base de l’anglais parlé et écrit. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ANGL 113, ESL ou EAP 140, 145, 150, ALS 100, 115, 120, 125, 160, ANGL 102 ou leurs équivalents. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire ou préalable ALS 105. Veuillez consulter l’article « Test obligatoire pour les étudiants ne présentant pas English 30 ou l’équivalent » dans la section de Faculté Saint-Jean de l’annuaire.
ALS 115 Niveau intermédiaire 1 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Étude des éléments et des structures complexes de l’anglais parlé et écrit. Note : Anciennement ANGL 113 et ALS 160. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ANGL 113, ESL ou EAP 140, 145, 150, ALS 120, 125, 160, ANGL 102 ou leurs équivalents. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire ou préalable ALS 110. Veuillez consulter l’article « Test obligatoire pour les étudiants ne présentant pas English 30 ou l’équivalent » dans la section de Faculté Saint-Jean de l’annuaire.
ALS 120 Niveau intermédiaire 2 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Étude des éléments et des structures complexes de l’anglais parlé et écrit. Note : Anciennement ANGL 113 et ALS 160. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ESL ou EAP 140, 145, 150, ALS 125, 160, ANGL 102 ou leurs équivalents. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire ou préalable ALS 115. Veuillez consulter l’article « Test obligatoire pour les étudiants ne présentant pas English 30 ou l’équivalent » dans la section de Faculté Saint-Jean de l’annuaire.
ALS 125 Introduction à l’anglais écrit, niveau universitaire =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Vise à faire acquérir les compétences communicatives écrites nécessaires à l’expression courante de niveau universitaire. Note: Anciennement ANGL 102. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ESL ou EAP 140, 145, 150, ALS 160, ANGL 102 ou leurs équivalents. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire ou préalable ALS 120. Veuillez consulter l’article « Test obligatoire pour les étudiants ne présentant pas English.
ALS 130 Pratique avancée de l’expression et de la compréhension orales =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Vise à faire acquérir les compétences communicatives en anglais nécessaires à l’expression orale de niveau universitaire. Affectation par test de placement obligatoire ou préalable ALS 125.
#
FSJ - Anthropologie
ANTHE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ANTHE 101 Introduction à l’anthropologie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une introduction à l’anthropologie par l’étude de concepts principaux et d’idées organisatrices tels que l’évolution humaine, l’apparition de la culture, l’organisation sociale, les théories de la culture, les systèmes symboliques, la dynamique de la culture. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en ANTHE 202 ou 201.
ANTHE 110 Ethnologie du sexe, de l’âge et du pouvoir =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Dans toute société, le statut social de l’individu et des groupes change au cours du cycle de la vie. Ce cours examine comment l’âge et le sexe privilégient les rôles et le statut social dans des sociétés différentes.
ANTHE 207 Introduction à l’anthropologie sociale et culturelle =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude comparative de la société et de la culture humaine, en insistant sur la famille, la structure sociale, l’économie, les institutions politiques et la religion, les procédures de changement, et l’histoire de l’anthropologie sociale et culturelle. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire. Note(s): *3 en ANTHE ou ANTHR sont fortement recommandés.
ANTHE 208 Introduction à l’anthropologie linguistique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude anthropologique du langage et de la communication. Aperçu rapide des méthodes d’enquête sur le terrain et des méthodes analytiques et théorie de l’anthropologie linguistique. Note(s): *3 en ANTHE ou ANTHR sont fortement recommandés
ANTHE 320 Anthropologie de la religion =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’étude comparative des religions et des phénomènes qui s’y rattachent; tels la magie, les tabous, le chamanisme et la sorcellerie. Des exemples ethnographiques sont utilisés pour appuyer une analyse des liens entre pensées et rites religieux et autres aspects de la vie sociale. Note(s): *3 en ANTHE ou ANTHR ou autre science sociale sont fortement recommandés.
ANTHE 365 Culture populaire =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Exploration approfondie de la culture populaire utilisant différentes approches théoriques et l’application des concepts de l’Anthropologie. Préalable(s): *3 en ANTHE, ou autre science sociale, niveau 100.
ANTHE 393 Culture et santé Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). D’une perspective multiculturelle et comparative : étude des croyances et des activités sociales associées à la santé et la guérison. Préalable(s) : *3 en ANTHE, ou autre cours de science sociale, niveau 100.
#
FSJ - Art dramatique
ADRAM
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ADRAM 101 Introduction à l’art théâtral =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 2-0-2). Les origines et le développement de l’art théâtral, notions de base sur la production d’un spectacle de théâtre: de la conception à la réalisation. Analyses critiques de pièces auxquelles les étudiants assistent.
ADRAM 103 Les procédés dramatiques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 2-0-2). Approche pratique et théorique au développement des ressources humaines par l’art dramatique. Introduction au jeu et à la forme théâtrale, avec insistance sur le processus de création, la stimulation des capacités de communiquer et de s’exprimer, l’imagination et la spontanéité.
ADRAM 201 Survol historique du théâtre universel =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Styles et formes du spectacle théâtral et leur relation changeante entre l’espace de jeu et le public, à partir du théâtre grec et romain jusqu’à nos jours. Oeuvres majeures, artistes et artisans du théâtre qui ont aidé au développement du langage théâtral tel que nous le connaissons aujourd’hui. Préalables: *3 en ADRAM ou l’équivalent.
ADRAM 249 Créativité et jeu dramatique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). La mise en évidence des possibilités créatrices du dialogue et de la nécessité de faire découvrir, par le jeu dramatique, le fond commun et permanent de la langue parlée et de la langue écrite. Pratique de la préparation et de la mise en marche des dramatisations, afin d’explorer la création des diverses formes dramatiques. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en FRANC 249.
ADRAM 302 Théâtres francophones du Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Perspectives contemporaines sur l’évolution du théâtre francophone au Canada. Étude des oeuvres qui ont marqué son histoire et des fonctions de la langue dans les répertoires dramatiques québécois et franco-canadiens. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 302. Préalables: *3 de niveau 200 parmi FRANC, CAFR, ADRAM, ou l’équivalent.
ADRAM 310 Lecture à voix haute =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Techniques de lecture à voix haute, exploration des ressources corporelles, vocales, musicales, visuelles et spatiales pour la lecture devant public. Survol historique de la lecture, interprétation de textes divers et procédés de mise en lecture publique. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant suivi FRANC 310. Préalables : *6 de niveau 200 parmi FRANC, ADRAM ou l’équivalent.
ADRAM 403 Théâtres francophones contemporains Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Études d’oeuvres dramatiques et de mouvements esthétiques appartenant à divers répertoires francophones contemporains. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en FRANC 403 et ADRAM/FRANC 303 Préalables : 6* de niveau 300 parmi FRANC, CAFR, ADRAM, ETCAN 330 et 332 ou l’équivalent.
ADRAM 410 Traduction du théâtre et de la littérature au Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à la traduction théâtrale. Étude des répertoires traduits d’une langue officielle à l’autre au Canada. Préalables : *6 de niveau 300 ou 400 parmi FRANC, CAFR, LINGQ ou ADRAM, ou l’équivalent. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en FRANC 410.
#
FSJ - Biochimie
BIOCM
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
BIOCM 200 Introduction á la biochimie I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux principes fondamentaux de la biochimie. Structures et fonctions des protéines; enzymes; lipides et structure des membranes biologiques; nucléotides et structures des acides nucléiques; bioénergétique et catabolisme des glucides. Préalable(s): CHIM 101; CHIM 164 ou 261 ou SCI 100.
BIOCM 310 Bioénergétique et métabolisme Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est conçu pour permettre une étude rigoureuse des mécanismes moléculaires touchant la bioénergétique et le métabolisme. Le contenu couvre les sujets suivants: les principes de la bioénergétique; les réactions et les voies impliquées dans le métabolisme des glucides, des lipides et de l’azote, ainsi que leur régulation; la phosphorylation oxydative; l’intégration et la régulation hormonale du métabolisme chez les mammifères. Préalable(s): BIOCM 200, CHIM 102 (ou SCI 100) et CHIM 263, avec une moyenne minimale de 2,7 dans ces trois cours.
BIOCM 330 Acides nucléiques et biologie moléculaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est prévu pour procurer aux étudiants une introduction à la biochimie des acides nucléiques. Il couvre: la structure et les propriétés des nucléotides et acides nucléiques; les technologies d’information basées sur l’ADN; la structure des gènes et des chromosomes; les mécanismes moléculaires de la réplication, de la réparation et de la recombinaison de l’ADN; métabolisme de l’ARN; synthèse et signaux cibles des protéines; régulation de l’expression des gènes. Préalable(s): BIOCM 200, CHIM 102 (ou SCI 100) et CHIM 263, avec une moyenne minimale de 2,7 dans ces troiscours. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour BIOCH 205.
#
FSJ - Biologie
BIOLE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
BIOLE 107 Introduction à la biologie cellulaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-3). Introduction à la structure et au fonctionnement de la cellule. Les principaux sujets étudiés comprennent les cellules procaryotes et eucaryotes, la bioénergétique, comment les cellules se reproduisent et comment l’information génétique est emmagasinée et utilisée à travers les processus de réplication de l’ADN, de transcription et de traduction. Préalable(s): Biologie 30 et Chimie 30. Note: BIOLE 107 n’est pas un préalable pour BIOLE 108.
BIOLE 108 Introduction à la diversité biologique Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-3). Examine les grandes lignées de la vie sur la Terre. Un survol des principes de l’évolution et de la classification, l’histoire de la vie et les adaptations clefs des procaryotes, protistes, eumycètes, végétaux et animaux. Les laboratoires examinent la diversité de formes et de fonctions biologiques, et introduisent l’étudiant à la collecte de données et à la rédaction scientifique. Préalable: Biologie 30. Note: BIOLE 107 n’est pas un préalable pour BIOLE 108.
BIOLE 201 Biologie cellulaire des eucaryotes Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une dissection structurale et fonctionnelle de la cellule eucaryote. Détection de molécules spécifiques au niveau ultrastructural; structure et fonction de la membrane plasmique; rôle du cytosquelette dans le transport intracellulaire, la mitose et la cytocinèse; le système endomembranaire, le ciblage des protéines, l’exocytose et l’endocytose; structure et fonction du noyau; contrôle du cycle cellulaire et cancer. Préalable(s): BIOLE 107 et un cours de CHIM de niveau 100, ou SCI 100. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CELL 201.
BIOLE 207 La génétique moléculaire et l’hérédité Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-3). Les principes chromosomiques et moléculaires de la transmission et du fonctionnement des gènes; la construction de cartes génétiques et physiques des gènes et des génomes; les protocoles utilisés pour isoler des gènes spécifiques. Seront aussi à l’étude les exemples de mécanismes régulateurs pour l’expression de matériel génétique chez les procaryotes et les eucaryotes. Préalable(s): BIOLE 107 ou SCI 100.
BIOLE 208 Les principes de l’écologie Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-3). L’écologie est l’étude scientifique des interactions entre les organismes et leur environnement selon une hiérarchie de niveaux d’organisation: les individus, les populations, les communautés et les écosystèmes. Destiné à donner à l’étudiant une vue générale des concepts de base en écologie, ce cours peut aussi servir de préparation à des cours plus avancés. Dans les laboratoires, l’accent sera sur le recueil, l’analyse et l’interprétation des données provenant d’expériences écologiques afin d’illustrer et compléter les notes du cours. Les exemples seront tirés d’une vaste étendue d’organismes et de systèmes. Préalable(s): BIOLE 108 ou SCI 100.
BIOLE 221 Mécanismes de l’évolution Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les principales caractéristiques du processus évolutif, incluant les données fossiles, les fondements de la génétique des populations, la sélection naturelle, l’adaptation et la spéciation. Préalable(s): BIOLE 107, 108 ou SCI 100. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour BIOLE 321.
BIOLE 380 Analyse génétique des populations Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-0). Application de la biologie moléculaire à l’étude de la systématique, de la structure des populations naturelles, des systèmes d’accouplement et de la criminalistique. Les sujets discutés incluent les techniques de détection de la variation génétique des populations naturelles, l’analyse phylogénétique de données moléculaires, les modèles mathématiques de la structure des populations, l’analyse de paternité et les empreintes génétiques. Préalable: BIOLE 207. BIOLE 221 est recommandé.
BIOLE 398 Projet de recherche Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-0-6). Recherche dirigée sous la supervision d’un membre du personnel académique qui effectue des recherches dans le domaine des sciences biologiques. Les résultatsde la recherche seront présentés sous la forme d’un rapport écrit. Préalable(s): Un cours de niveau 200 en biologie ou en biochimie et l’approbation du superviseur de recherche. Note: L’accès à ce cours peut être limité par la disponibilité d’un superviseur de recherché.
BIOLE 399 Projet de recherche Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-0-6). Recherche dirigée sous la supervision d’un membre du personnel académique qui effectue des recherches dans le domaine des sciences biologiques. Les résultats de la recherche seront présentés sous la forme d’un rapport écrit. Préalable(s): Un cours de niveau 200 en biologie ou en biochimie et l’approbation du superviseur de recherche. Note: L’accès à ce cours peut être limité par la disponibilité d’un superviseur derecherche.
BIOLE 490 Étude dirigée Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-0-6). L’inscription dépendra d’une entente préalable entre l’étudiant et un professeur qui serait prêt à superviser le projet. Des crédits peuvent être obtenus plus d’une fois pour ce cours. Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 300 en sciences biologiques et l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques. Note: L’accès à ce cours peut être limité par la disponibilité d’un superviseur de recherche.
BIOLE 498 Projet de recherche Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-0-6). Recherche dirigée dans le laboratoire d’un membre du personnel académique en biologie. Des crédits peuvent être obtenus plus d’une fois pour ce cours. Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 300 en sciences biologiques et l’approbation du superviseur de recherche. Note: L’accès à ce cours peut être limité par la disponibilité d’un superviseur de recherche.
BIOLE 499 Projet de recherche Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 0-0-6). Recherche dirigée dans le laboratoire d’un membre du personnel académique en biologie. La complétion de ce projet requiert une présentation orale et un rapport écrit sur le projet de recherche. Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 300 en sciences biologiques et l’approbation du superviseur de recherche. Note: L’accès à ce cours peut être limité par la disponibilité d’un superviseur de recherche.
#
FSJ - Chimie
CHIM
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
CHIM 101 Introduction à la chimie I Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-1s-3). Structure atomique, liaisons covalentes, thermochimie, équilibre chimique, acides et bases, les éléments représentatifs. Préalable(s): Chimie 30 ou l’équivalent.
CHIM 102 Introduction à la chimie II Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-1s-3). États de la matière et forces intermoléculaires, solubilité et solutions, électrochimie, thermodynamique chimique, cinétique chimique, liaison et propriétés des métaux de transition. Préalable: CHIM 101.
CHIM 103 Introduction à la chimie I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-1s-3/2). Stoechiométrie, gaz parfaits, thermochimie, équilibre chimique, acides et bases, structure atomique et liaison chimique. Préalable(s): Chimie 30 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiants de génie.
CHIM 105 Introduction à la chimie II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-3/2). Solubilité, cellule électrochimique et équation de Nernst, cinétique chimique, modes de liaison et structure, cinétique chimique, modes de liaison et structure, chimie des éléments de transition. Préalable: CHIM 103. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiants de génie.
CHIM 164 Chimie organique I Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-3). Étude de la structure moléculaire de base et de la réactivité des composés organiques basée sur leurs groupes fonctionnels. Introduction à la nomenclature, la structure tridimensionnelle, les propriétés physiques et la réactivité des composés du carbone. L’accent sera mis sur les alcanes, les alcènes, les alcynes, les halogénures d’alkyle, les alcools et certains composés aromatiques. Les exemples comprendront des hydrocarbures (produits pétroliers), les composés organiques halogénés (par ex. les pesticides) et les polymères d’une importance industrielle que l’on retrouve dans la vie quotidienne. Préalable(s) : Chimie 30 ou l’équivalent. Note(s) : (1) Les étudiants qui ont des crédits pour CHIM 101 doivent s’inscrire à CHIM 261. (2) Limité aux étudiants avec une moyenne minimale de 90% en Chimie 30, ou l’approbation du vice-doyen aux affaires académiques. (3) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CHIM 161.
CHIM 211 Analyse quantitative I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-4). Principes, méthodes et applications expérimentales avec emphase sur les équilibres de phases solubles, la titrimétrie, les compétences en laboratoire, et l’évaluation de données expérimentales. Exemples en analyse organique et inorganique. Préalable(s): CHIM 102 ou SCI 100.
CHIM 261 Chimie organique I Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-3). Corrélation des structures et des liaisons chimiques des composés de carbone avec les propriétés physiques et la réactivité chimique des molécules organiques. Étude des groupes fonctionnels; l’accent sera mis sur les hydrocarbures et leurs dérivés qui contiennent les hétéroatomes (halogènes, oxygène, soufre, et groupe hydroxy). Introduction à la stéréochimie, la structure tridimensionnelle, les mécanismes, en particulier addition aux doubles liaisons, substitution nucléophile et réactions d’élimination. Préalable(s): CHIM 101 ou 103. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CHIM 161 ou 164. (2) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours auront *4.5.
CHIM 263 Chimie organique II Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-3). Continuation de l’étude des propriétés structurales et chimiques des groupes fonctionnels avec l’accent sur les alcynes, les composés aromatiques, les aldéhydes, les cétones, les acides carboxyliques et leurs dérivés, et les amines. Exemples de ces groupes fonctionnels dans les produits naturels; les hydrates de carbone, les amino-acides et les protéines, les acides nucléiques, et les lipides. Étude de la déduction des structures des molécules organiques par spectroscopie infrarouge et spectroscopie de résonance magnétique nucléaire. Préalable(s): CHIM 161 ou 164 ou 261 ou SCI 100. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CHIM 163.
CHIM 340 Chimie verte (ou la chimie durable) Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à la chimie verte. Les douze principes de la chimie verte ; Déchets chimiques: Impacts sur la santé et l’environnement, et prévention; Nouvelles réactions et méthodes utilisant des produits chimiques bénins; Ressources renouvelables; Biocatalyse et bioprocédés. Préalable(s): CHIM 102 ou 105; CHIM 164 ou 261; CHIM 263.
#
FSJ - Economie
ECONE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ECONE 101 Introduction à la micro-économie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse du processus de détermination des produits et des quantités à produire en économie de marché. Étude de la répartition du revenu au Canada.
ECONE 102 Introduction à la macro-économie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude de l’emploi, de l’inflation, des politiques monétaires et fiscales au Canada. Préalable: ECONE 101.
ECONE 223 Enjeux économiques mondiaux Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Description de la place du Canada dans le monde économique. Analyses des principales forces économiques au niveau mondial. Discussion de ce que constitue le libre-échange. Identification des blocs économiques (ALENA, Mercosur, UE, ASEAN).
ECONE 281 Microéconomie intermédiaire I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Présentation de la théorie néoclassique du consommateur, du producteur et de la détermination des prix et des quantités dans le cas de marchés concurrentiels, de monopole et de certaines autres structures de marché. Préalable(s): ECONE 101 ou équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ECON 383 ou MANEC 301.
ECONE 282 Macroéconomie intermédiaire I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux modèles analytiques de la macroéconomie. Présentation des modèles à prix fixes et flexibles de la détermination du taux d’intérêt, de la production et de l’emploi. Étude des relations entre le marché de l’emploi et l’offre agrégée. Analyse des conséquences de la politique fiscale et monétaire ainsi que des chocs d’offre. Analyse en économie ouverte avec taux de change fixe et flexible. Étude des mouvements de capitaux. Préalable(s): ECONE 101 et 102 ou équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MANEC 301 et 402.
ECONE 299 Méthodes quantitatives en économie Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-1). Introduction à l’utilisation des outils mathématiques en économie avec applications. Préalable(s): ECONE 101 et 102, STATQ 151 ou STAT 141 ou SCI 151 et MATHQ 114 (ou 113) ou SCI 100. Note: Ce cours doit être suivi avant ECONE 399.
ECONE 303 Thèmes d’économie I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le contenu peut varier d’année en année. Les sujets seront annoncés avant la période d’inscription. Préalable: ECONE 101. Des préalables additionnels pourront être exigés.
ECONE 323 Économie internationale =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Aperçu des principes de l’économie internationale. Application de ces principes à la politique économique. L’accent est mis sur des sujets comme le commerce international, l’Investissement étranger et la balance des paiements. Préalable(s): ECONE 101 et 102, ou ECONE 223.
ECONE 365 Économie des ressources =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des problèmes reliés à l’exploitation de ressources naturelles renouvelables et non-renouvelables, incluant l’exploration, l’extraction et la taxation; rareté et détermination des prix des ressources; politiques canadiennes actuelles touchant ces sujets. Préalable(s): ECONE 101 ou équivalent. Note: ECON 365 et AREC 365 ne peuvent pas être suivis tous les deux pour crédits.
ECONE 384 Microéconomie intermédiaire II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Développement élaboré de la théorie microéconomique et de certaines applications, avec un accent sur l’équilibre général. Certains des sujets suivants seront aussi abordés : Choix intertemporels, choix risqués, l’incertain et l’hypothèse de l’utilité attendue; l’oligopole et la théorie des jeux, modèle walrasien et modèles avec entrée; économie du bienêtre, biens publics, choix collectifs; problèmes d’information asymétrique (risque moral et antisélection). Préalable(s): ECONE 281 et 299 ou équivalent.
ECONE 385 Macroéconomie intermédiare II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Théories des politiques de stabilisation; anticipation; les contraintes budgétaires du gouvernement; inflation et chômage; cycles économiques; théories de la consommation agrégées, de l’investissement, de la demande de monnaie et de l’offre de monnaie. Préalable(s) : ECONE 281, 282 et 299 ou équivalent..
ECONE 399 Introduction à l’économétrie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-1). Introduction aux méthodes statistiques utilisées dans l’analyse des problèmes économiques empiriques. Présentation et développement des principaux sujets de l’économétrie, avec un accent sur les techniques de régression linéaire. Préalable(s): ECONE 281, 282 et 299 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour AREC 313 ou ECON 408 ou MGTSC 413 ou 414 ou 417 ou 419 ou STAT 341.
#
FSJ - Education - Fondements
EDU F
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
EDU F 200 Introduction à la pratique de l’enseignement Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-4). Ce cours se présente en deux volets et vise à offrir à l’étudiant un aperçu de la pratique de l’enseignement dans le milieu scolaire. La première partie est centrée sur l’étude de thèmes tels que le rôle de l’enseignant, la réalité de la salle de classe, les responsabilités de la profession, et l’enseignant comme modèle linguistique. L’autre partie du cours consiste en une série d’observations participantes vécues dans une variété de contextes scolaires. Le cours permettra à l’étudiant de saisir l’importance de l’engagement personnel et professionnel associé à la carrière d’enseignant. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU E 331, EDU E 231 et EDUC 200. Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e)s du programme BEd.
EDU F 211 Théories d’acquisition d’une langue première et d’une langue seconde Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le cours abordera les principales théories relatives à l’acquisition des langues maternelles, secondes et étrangères, tout en ayant une résonnance pratique. Les situations de plurilinguisme/pluriculturalisme et leurs impacts sur l’apprentissage seront également au coeur de ce cours. Note: Ce cours est susceptible d’offrir l’option CSL en partenariat avec le programme « Community Service Learning ». Dans ce cas, les étudiants auront la possibilité d’effectuer un stage de bénévolat de 20 heures avec un organisme communautaire à but non lucratif et/ou avec un organisme éducatif.
EDU F 235 École et société Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours examine les rapports entre les écoles, les salles de classe, les communautés et la société. Il vise à sensibiliser les étudiants aux enjeux de l’équité et à mieux comprendre les processus d’inclusion et d’exclusion en milieu scolaire. Ce cours offre aux étudiants l’option de faire un stage de bénévolat de 20 heures avec un organisme communautaire à but non lucratif dans le cadre du programme « Community Service-Learning ». Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour FO ED 200.
EDU F 236 Contexte des écoles francophones en milieu minoritaire et des écoles d’immersion Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours de fondement à l’intention des futurs enseignants qui se dirigent vers l’enseignement dans les écoles francophones en milieu minoritaire ou dans les écoles d’immersion française. Seront abordés et analysés les origines, les rôles, les buts de l’un et l’autre système ainsi que les enjeux spécifiques et les traits distinctifs propres à chacun d’eux. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour FO ED 302 ou EDU F 336 ou EDU F 337.
EDU F 238 Histoire de la pensée en éducation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Revue des grandes écoles de pensée qui ont influencé l’éducation en Occident. Les étudiants seront appelés à réfléchir sur chacune de ces écoles de pensée et à se situer par rapport aux implications éducatives de chacune de ces écoles de pensée. Chaque thème sera accompagné de ses implications dans la salle de classe et dans l’acte éducatif. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour FO ED 302.
EDU F 244 Fondements et théories de l’apprentissage scolaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des principaux courants théoriques de l’apprentissage scolaire (behavioriste, cognitif, socioconstructiviste, etc.). L’accent sera notamment mis sur les principes d’apprentissage découlant des approches cognitives, constructivistes et socioconstructivistes, principes qui sont à la base des programmes d’études albertains. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU P 240 ou pour PS ED 201.
EDU F 434 L’enseignant professionnel Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours comprend deux parties. Une partie est centrée sur un projet synthèse découlant du développement d’un portfolio professionnel. L’autre partie traite de la structure du système d’éducation en Alberta, de la responsabilité des enseignants devant les lois et envers la communauté scolaire, ainsi que des obligations professionnelles. Préalables: EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU E 434.
#
FSJ - Education - Methodologie et Curriculum
EDU M
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
EDU M 232 Introduction aux stratégies d’enseignement Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Dans ce cours, les étudiants seront initiés à diverses stratégies d’enseignement, de planification et d’évaluation formative. Ce cours comprend des ateliers pratiques d’enseignement. Préalable : EDU F 200. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU E 232 ou 332 ou EDUC 201.
EDU M 315 Enseignement de l’éducation physique au niveau élémentaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Étude du programme d’études, des stratégies d’enseignement et d’évaluation et de l’utilisation des technologies pour appuyer l’enseignement de l’éducation physique à l’élémentaire. Préalable: EDU F 200.
EDU M 317 Initiation à la création artistique en milieu scolaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Découverte du langage de l’art, de sa spécificité et de son esthétique. Introduction par atelier aux principes fondamentaux des programmes d’études concernés. Préalable : EDU F 200 ou EDU M 232.
EDU M 319 Littératie pour la petite enfance Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours vise l’éveil aux facettes de la littératie dans le monde de la petite enfance. L’apport linguistique, culturel et familial servira de base pour explorer les enjeux pédagogiques à considérer dans les propos d’enseignement pour les jeunes enfants. Préalable : EDU F 200 ou EDU M 232.
EDU M 323 Éducation musicale selon les méthodes actives actuelles: maternelle à 3e année Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Approche vocale et interactive fondée sur la philosophie kodalienne et conduisant à la maîtrise des relations mélodiqueset des formules rythmiques de base. Survol des méthodes actives et d’autres méthodes actuelles. Participation active aux jeux, rondes, et danses d’un repertoire de chansons folkloriques qui contribue à l’appropriation de la langue française et de l’identité culturelle. Le cours présente aussi des démarches pédagogiques pour une formation continue de la maternelle à la 3e année du primaire. Soutien d’outils didactiques: recueils de chants avec CD et DVD. Préalable(s): MUSIQ 100 ou l’équivalent avec l’approbation du professeur, MUSIQ 103.
EDU M 324 Éducation musicale selon les méthodes actives actuelles: 4e à 6e année Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Ce cours fait suite au cours EDU M 323 fondé sur l’approche vocale et interactive. Le développement personnel en lecture musicale est orienté vers les concepts et les habiletés à travailler dans le programme d’études. Le cours présente aussi des démarches pédagogiques, un répertoire de canons, de chansons harmonisées, des danses folkloriques et des stratégies de présentation des grandes oeuvres appropriées aux jeunes du 2e cycle du primaire. On y propose aussi une initiation à quelques instruments utilisés en classe de 6e année. Soutien d’outils didactiques : recueils de chants avec CD et DVD. Préalable(s): EDU M 323, MUSIQ 210 (ou MUSIQ 151 ou 155).
EDU M 331 Intégration du contenu et de la langue dans l’enseignement en milieu francophone et immersif Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Introduction au développement de programmes visant à intégrer l’enseignement du contenu et de la langue/littératie avancée de manière optimale. Les principes de l’approche des langues axés sur le contenu ainsi que les méthodes d’enseignement propices au développement et à l’implantation de ce type de programme (p. ex., stratégies d’instruction et d’évaluation) seront étudiés. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 341 Les technologies de l’information et de la communication Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Ce cours propose un regard critique sur le rôle et la place de la technologie dans un contexte d’enseignement du français en immersion et en milieu francophone minoritaire. Les étudiants se familiariseront avec l’utilisation des technologies actuelles et émergentes en salle de classe et exploreront le potentiel pédagogique des technologies nouvelles comme support à l’instruction et à l’apprentissage. Le cours mettra l’accent sur les théories ainsi que les stratégies d’instruction et les méthodes d’évaluation considérées optimales pour l’intégration de la technologie dans le contexte de l’éducation au 21e siècle. Le cours sensibilisera aussi les étudiants à l’utilisation des technologies au service d’un enseignement inclusif. Préalables: EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 342 L’enseignement moral et religieux Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Fondements de l’enseignement moral et religieux dans une société libérale-démocratique. Perspectives de l’enseignement moral et religieux dans les écoles confessionnelles et non-confessionnelles. Implications pratiques dans la salle de classe et dans l’acte éducatif. Préalables: EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 343 Littératie maternelle à 3e année Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Dans ce cours les étudiants développeront leur compréhension du concept de littératie précoce. Ils se familiariseront avec les différentes composantes de l’oral, de la lecture et de l’écriture et prendront conscience des liens qui existent entre ces trois habiletés. Ils se familiariseront avec plusieurs stratégies d’enseignement et d’évaluation basées sur les principes de l’enseignement stratégique et de la construction des connaissances. Ils apprendront également à adapter ces stratégies et à utiliser la technologie pour répondre aux besoins variés des élèves. Ils se serviront du programme d’études pour concevoir des mini-leçons qu’ils enseigneront dans des situations authentiques en salle de classe. Préalables: EDU F 200, EDU M 232, EDU F 244. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU M 311.
EDU M 344 Littératie 4e à 6e année Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Cours de méthodologie pour l’enseignement du français en immersion et en milieu francophone minoritaire de la 4e à la 6e année du primaire. Les étudiants se familiariseront avec plusieurs stratégies d’enseignement et d’évaluation de la lecture et de l’écriture et se sensibiliseront à l’importance de l’oral dans l’acquisition de ces habiletés. Ils apprendront à adapter ces stratégies et à utiliser la technologie pour répondre aux besoins variés des élèves. Ils se serviront du programme d’études pour concevoir une séquence didactique basée sur les principes de l’enseignement stratégique et de la construction des connaissances. L’enseignement de la grammaire en contexte sera également abordé. Préalable(s) : EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU M 311.
EDU M 358 Enseignement de la musique au niveau secondaire I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). L’enseignement du chant choral et l’administration d’un ensemble vocal à l’école secondaire. Les sujets tels que le recrutement et les auditions des choristes, l’échauffement vocal, le choix de répertoire, les techniques de répétition et la planification de concerts seront tous abordés. Préalable(s) ou concomitant(s) : *9 dans la spécialisation, incluant MUSIQ 140 et 315, EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 359 Enseignement de la musique au niveau secondaire II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). L’enseignement d’une fanfare et l’administration d’un ensemble instrumental à l’école secondaire. Les sujets tels que la création d’une fanfare, le recrutement et les auditions de musiciens, le choix d’instrument, les techniques de répétition, le choix de répertoire et la planification de concerts seront tous abordés. Préalable(s)ou concomitant(s): *9 dans la spécialisation incluant MUSIC 141 et un de MUSIC 209, 211 ou 216, et EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 360 L’art dramatique comme outil pédagogique Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours portera sur les pratiques théâtrales et leur utilisation en tenant compte des résultats d’apprentissage des programmes d’études à l’élémentaire et au secondaire; par exemple: jeux de rôles, marionnettes, improvisation. Préalable : EDU F 200 ou EDU M 232.
EDU M 361 Enseignement de l’éducation physique au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Initiation à l’enseignement de l’éducation physique. Sujets étudiés: les programmes du ministère de l’Éducation, les stratégies d’enseignement et leur adaptation pour répondre aux besoins variés des élèves, l’utilisation des technologies et des méthodes d’évaluation pour soutenir l’apprentissage. Préalable : EDU F 200 ou EDU M 232.
EDU M 362 Didactiques de l’anglais au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à l’enseignement de l’anglais au secondaire. Sujets étudiés: les programmes du ministère de l’Éducation, les stratégies d’enseignement et leur adaptation pour répondre aux besoins variés des élèves, l’utilisation des technologies et des méthodes d’évaluation pour soutenir l’apprentissage. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 412 Didactique des mathématiques au niveau élémentaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à l’enseignement des mathématiques à l’élémentaire. Sujets étudiés: les programmes d’études, stratégies et techniques d’enseignement et d’évaluation, les calculatrices, les ordinateurs, la communication, la pensée et la compréhension mathématique, les influences sur l’enseignement/l’apprentissage des mathématiques, les techniques d’évaluation. Préalable: EDU F 200 et 244 et EDU M 232.
EDU M 413 Didactiques des sciences au niveau élémentaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à l’enseignement des sciences à l’élémentaire. Sujets étudiés : les programmes du ministère de l’Éducation, les stratégies et techniques d’enseignement et d’évaluation, le lien entre science/ technologie/société. Préalables: EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 414 Didactiques des études sociales à l’élémentaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à l’enseignement des études sociales à l’élémentaire. Étude et interprétation des exigences du programme du ministère de l’Éducation et des ressources prescrites pour enseigner les études sociales en milieu francophone et en milieu d’immersion française. Sensibilisation au rôle que jouent les études sociales dans le développement du citoyen et l’éveil à la conscience identitaire. Planification de l’enseignement des études sociales et stratégies d’enseignement. Préalables : EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 452 Enseignement du français au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours de méthodologie pour l’enseignement du français en immersion et en milieu francophone minoritaire. Étude des nouvelles tendances dans la didactique de l’écriture. Principes et démarche pour la planification d’une séquence d’apprentissage basée sur les stratégies d’écriture dans le contexte d’un type de texte spécifique. Intégration de la grammaire à la production écrite. Méthodes d’évaluation des textes. Préalables: EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 453 Enseignement de la littérature au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Pédagogie générale et pratique de la littérature: méthode d’enseignement du roman, de la pièce de théâtre et de la poésie. Étude des moyens de favoriser la pratique de la lecture libre en français. Étude des processus et des stratégies de lecture. Préalables : EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 456 L’enseignement des mathématiques au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours a pour but de préparer les étudiants à enseigner les mathématiques à tous les niveaux du secondaire; d’acquérir quelques principes fondamentaux nécessaires à une conception adéquate des mathématiques et de leur didactique. Ce cours propose diverses stratégies pour encourager l’apprentissage des mathématiques d’une façon concrète. Préalables: EDU F 200 et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 457 L’enseignement des sciences au niveau secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Ce cours permettra à l’étudiant de connaître à fond le contenu et les objectifs du curriculum de sciences à tous les niveaux du secondaire; les différentes méthodes de présenter un concept en sciences; les nouvelles applications technologiques dans l’enseignement de la science; et l’équipement existant pour faciliter l’enseignement de la science. Préalables : EDU F 200, et 244, EDU M 232.
EDU M 458 Enseignement des études sociales au secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des programmes et des objectifs d’apprentissage prescrits à chacun des deux cycles du secondaire. Examen des méthodes et des stratégies d’enseignement et d’évaluation adaptées aux diverses clientèles scolaires. Exploration tant des ressources prescrites que de celles mises à disposition par les réseaux des technologies de l’information. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU M 454 ou EDU M 455.
EDU M 459 Actualité et Média Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Pédagogie générale et pratique de l’intégration et de l’analyse d’événements, de problématiques sociales et de questions d’actualité en salle de classe. Formation de l’apprenant à la citoyenneté informée et à la littératie des médias. Analyse de l’action des médias électroniques et écrits sur la formation de l’opinion qu’une collectivité se fait de la réalité, mais aussi d’elle-même. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU M 455.
EDU M 498 Séminaire citoyenneté globale et justice sociale Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3s-0). Ce séminaire prépare un séjour de volontariat international en pays francophone. Il permet d’organiser le séjour qui aura lieu en mai. Il amène les étudiants à réfléchir sur leur implication citoyenne à l’échelle globale mais aussi locale et à se positionner comme agent de changement sur le plan de la justice sociale. Le cours, interdisciplinaire, est disponible à tout étudiant de l’université de l’Alberta, sous réserve de places suffisantes. Le séminaire comprend une composante obligatoire d’apprentissage par le service à la communauté (Community Service Learning, CSL). Celle-ci amènera les étudiants à faire du volontariat auprès d’associations locales, en lien avec leur future orientation professionnelle. Prérequis linguistique: entretien de sélection en français. Note(s): (1) Ce cours doit être suivi avant EDU S 350. (2) Ce cours peut également être appliqué au Certificate in Community Engagement and Service-Learning. Certificate in International Learning, et Certificate in Global Citizenship.
#
FSJ - Education - Psychologie
EDU P
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
EDU P 242 Introduction au développement de l’enfant Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude du développement de l’enfant de 6 à 12 ans en tenant compte des plans physiques, cognitifs, affectifs, conatifs et sociaux comme fondement de l’enseignement au primaire. Interrelation entre ces dimensions dans une optique d’intervention scolaire. Processus et étapes de développement en lien avec l’approche écologique. Rôle de l’adulte et des pairs dans l’acquisition des savoirs des élèves de cette tranche d’âge. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour PS ED 200 ou EDU P 239.
EDU P 243 Introduction au développement de l’adolescent Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude du développement de l’adolescent de 13 à 18 ans en tenant compte des plans physiques, psychosexuels, cognitifs, affectifs, conatifs, identitaires et sociaux comme fondement de l’enseignement au secondaire. Interrelation entre ces dimensions dans une optique d’intervention scolaire. Processus et étapes de développement en lien avec l’approche écologique. Exploration de certaines problématiques comme l’anorexie, le décrochage scolaire et la cyber-intimidation en lien avec les élèves de cette tranche d’âge. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour PS ED 200 ou EDU P 239.
EDU P 245 Interactions sociales et communication Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours offre une introduction aux principaux paradigmes de la communication et des relations interpersonnelles. Il vise l’appropriation et l’approfondissement des modèles théoriques, des méthodes d’analyse et de communication et des stratégies pour comprendre la dynamique relationnelle afin d’intervenir sur celle-ci. Cette dynamique relationnelle renvoie à différentes situations de communication et relations interpersonnelles quotidiennes propres au milieu scolaire actuel (élèves, enseignants, parents, administrateurs, etc.). Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour PS ED 250 et EDU P 241
EDU P 333 École, famille, communauté Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse des problèmes que les besoins changeants de la famille et de la communauté posent à l’école (contexte francophone minoritaire/immersion française).
EDU P 342 Évaluation des apprentissages Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours fait l’étude de l’évaluation des apprentissages ancrée dans les principes de validité, fidélité et équité. Différentes méthodes d’évaluation de l’apprentissage et pour l’apprentissage seront abordées tout en traitant de la dichotomie entre l’évaluation critériée et normative. Ce cours fait la mise au point de l’évaluation diagnostique, formative et sommative. L’accent sera mis sur l’application et le développement de divers instruments de mesure (examens, grille d’observation et de notations, barèmes de corrections, instructions, etc.) dans le champ disciplinaire de l’étudiant. Un exposé sera fait sur les tests à grande échelle (les tests de rendement scolaire et de diplôme) et sur l’interprétation des résultats. Préalables : EDU F 200 ou EDU F 244 et EDU M 232. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU P 340.
EDU P 433 La communication et la gestion en salle de classe Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude approfondie des modèles théoriques et pratiques de gestion en salle de classe. L’application de certaines stratégies de gestion sera aussi abordée. Nous nous pencherons aussi sur la communication avec les parents ayant des enfants manifestant des comportements inadaptés. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU E 433 ou EDUC 300.
EDU P 442 Inclusion scolaire et modèles d’intervention Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Études des politiques, des normes et du système de codification en vigueur pour les élèves albertains ayant des besoins particuliers. Analyse des modèles courants d’inclusion scolaire. Étude des attitudes et croyances des enseignants envers l’inclusion scolaire. Modalité d’application du plan d’intervention et adaptation de l’enseignant en fonction du profil spécifique de ces élèves. Pratiques novatrices de la gestion des différences dans le but de favoriser l’inclusion scolaire totale de tous les élèves. Préalables: EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour PS ED 300.
EDU P 444 Interventions auprès des élèves ayant de difficultés d’apprentissage Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude portant sur l’adaptation de l’enseignement et le soutien aux élèves du primaire et du secondaire ayant des difficultés d’apprentissage. Problématiques liées aux élèves ayant des difficultés d’apprentissage (éléments contextuels, manifestations des difficultés, etc.). Cadre théorique et état des connaissances sur la nature des difficultés, de leurs effets et de leur étiologie. Apprentissage d’interventions visant à soutenir l’élève en difficulté dans le développement de stratégies d’apprentissage cognitives, métacognitives, motivationnelles en contexte d’analyse de tâche, de préparation aux examens, d’étude et de rédaction de travaux. Préalables : EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU P 443 ou PS ED 482.
EDU P 445 Interventions auprès des élèves ayant des difficultés de comportement Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude de l’étiologie et de la taxonomie des difficultés comportementales chez les élèves du primaire et du secondaire. Initiation des étudiants à l’utilisation des différentes théories afin d’analyser et de comprendre les troubles du comportement extériorisés et intériorisés selon une perspective développementale. Sensibilisation des étudiants aux méthodes d’évaluation et de modification de comportement en contexte scolaire. Préalables: EDU F 200 et EDU M 232. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour EDU P 443 ou PS ED 482.
#
FSJ - Education - Stage
EDU S
Faculté Saint-Jean
Note: Des frais de placement seront exigés pour les cours suivants. Veuillez consulter Fall 2016/Winter 2017 Undergraduate Instructional and Non-Instructional Fees pour de plus amples détails.
Cours de 1er cycle
EDU S 350 Stage interdisciplinaire et volontariat international Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre). Ce cours consiste en un séjour intensif d’environ trois semaines dans un pays francophone. Les étudiants, selon leur programme d’études et leurs aspirations, bénéficieront d’un placement auprès de partenaires locaux tels que des écoles, des hôpitaux, des orphelinats, différents médas ou encore des ONG locales oeuvrant à l’insertion sociale et au développement durable (ferme biologique, ateliers d’artisans, associations sportives), etc. Les étudiants auront l’occasion de développer des contacts avec les locaux par le biais de diverses activités sociales et de volontariats autres que leur placement principal (projet de construction notamment). Préalable: EDU M 498. Note: Ce cours peut également être appliqué au Certificate in Community Engagement and Service-Learning, Certificate in International Learning et Certificate in Global Citizenship.
EDU S 420 Enseignement pratique: niveau élémentaire Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 7 semaines). Stage pratique de 7 semaines dans un milieu scolaire (immersion française ou français en milieu minoritaire) à partir de la rentrée scolaire. Préalable: EDU E 331 ou l’équivalent. Note(s): Ce cours occasionne des frais additionnels. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour ENPRQ 300.
EDU S 421 Enseignement pratique: niveau élémentaire Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 7 semaines). (Semestre d’hiver) Stage pratique de 7 semaines dans un milieu scolaire (immersion française ou français en milieu minoritaire). Préalable(s): EDU S 420. Note(s): Ce cours occasionne des frais additionnels. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour ENPRQ 350.
EDU S 470 Enseignement pratique: niveau secondaire Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 7 semaines). Stage pratique de 7 semaines dans un milieu scolaire (immersion française ou français en milieu minoritaire) à partir de la rentrée scolaire. Préalable(s): EDU E 331 ou l’équivalent. Note(s): Ce cours occasionne des frais additionnels. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour ENPRQ 310.
EDU S 471 Enseignement pratique: niveau secondaire Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 7 semaines). Stage pratique de 7 semaines dans un milieu scolaire (immersion française ou français en milieu minoritaire). Préalable(s): EDU S 470. Note(s): Ce cours occasionne des frais additionnels. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour ENPRQ 360.
#
FSJ - Espagnol
ESPA
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ESPA 100 Espagnol langue seconde Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 5-0-0). Études des éléments et des structures de base de l’espagnol parlé et écrit. Note: Ce cours se destine aux étudiants qui n’ont aucune connaissance de la langue espagnole. Il n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulants des crédits pour Spanish 35, SPAN 100 ou leurs équivalents. Priorité est donnée aux étudiants de la Faculté Saint-Jean.
#
FSJ - Etudes canadiennes
ETCAN
Faculté Saint-Jean
Les cours M EDU sont réservés aux étudiants inscrits dans un programme de 2e ou de 3e cycle.
Cours de 1er cycle
ETCAN 101 Introduction à l’étude du Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Présente un survol de la vie au Canada dans sa spécificité, pouvant inclure les aspects artistique, culturel, politique, social, et économique; introduit au champ interdisciplinaire des Études canadiennes.
ETCAN 201 Introduction au système de justice canadien =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours s’adresse aux étudiants intéressés par une carrière juridique ou une carrière où des notions de base en droit sont requises ou valorisées. Les questions suivantes seront étudiées: les sources du droit, les institutions juridiques, le raisonnement juridique, les droits linguistiques et les professions juridiques.
ETCAN 330 Les francophonies canadiennes et acadiennes I : perspectives historiques et culturelles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les fondements et l’évolution des communautés francophones et acadiennes du Canada, du Régime français à aujourd’hui, par l’étude de textes littéraires, historiographiques et ethnologiques. Un aperçu de leurs traditions orales, de leurs pratiques culturelles et des rapports avec les cultures avoisinantes : Autochtones, Loyalistes, Irlandais, etc. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ETCAN 322 et CA FR 320.
ETCAN 332 Les francophonies canadiennes et acadiennes II: perspectives idéologiques et politiques. =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). La civilisation et la culture du Canada français et de l’Acadie, du Régime français à nos jours, par l’étude des idéologies politiques et des procédés juridiques régissant leur développement et leurs modes de communication collective. Le statut ambivalent de majoritaire/minoritaire vu à travers le prisme du post- colonialisme et du multiculturalisme. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ETCAN 322 et CA FR 322.
ETCAN 360 La question nationale au Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une étude des nationalismes canadien/ Canadian, québécois et amérindiens, dans les traditions politiques, intellectuelles et artistiques du Canada. Préalable(s): *6 à sigle ETCAN ou à contenu canadien dans les disciplines suivantes: économie, histoire, science politique, sociologie.
ETCAN 450 Enjeux canadiens actuels =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Un examen interdisciplinaire d’enjeux choisis dans les domaines culturel, économique, politique et social, auxquels le Canada fait actuellement face. Préalable(s): *6 à contenu canadien de niveau 300 ou 400, dont au moins *3 à sigle ETCAN.
Cours de 2e cycle
ETCAN 500 Méthodologies interdisciplinaire et multidisciplinaire =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’interdisciplinarité et à la multidisciplinarité comme méthodologies de recherche. Possibilités et limites de telles approches méthodologiques. Critiques des méthodologies de recherche du point de vue de l’interdisciplinarité et de la multidisciplinarité et application à des exemples canadiens. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 501 Méthodologies de recherche =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Préparation à la définition de la problématique de recherche choisie. Les étudiants seront invités à définir dans ce séminaire leur problème de recherche et à illustrer leur choix par des exemples tirés de la société canadienne en fonction d’une approche interdisciplinaire ou multidisciplinaire. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 504 Enjeux canadiens =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse critique des enjeux portant sur le Canada. Culture et institutions en relation avec les contextes historiques et sociaux. Relations et conflits socio-politiques. Relations de sexe/genre, race, langue et classes. Nationalisme, régionalisme et mondialisation. Relations économie, société et État. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 508 Séminaire d’Études canadiennes I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3s-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire. Le contenu varie d’une année à l’autre. Les sujets sont annoncés avant la période d’inscription.
ETCAN 510 Séminaire d’Études canadiennes II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3s-0). Le contenu varie d’une année à l’autre. Les sujets sont annoncés avant la période d’inscription. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 512 Les grandes oeuvres en Études canadiennes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude de textes fondateurs dans les différentes disciplines des Études canadiennes. Contexte historique et impact sur les études sur le Canada. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 513 Thèmes choisis en Études canadiennes I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
ETCAN 515 Thèmes choisis en Études canadiennes II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
#
FSJ - Etudes de la religion
ET RE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ET RE 102 Introduction aux religions de l’Occident =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Parcours historique des religions judaïque, chrétienne et islamique.
ET RE 248 La tradition chrétienne =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les thèmes classiques de la chrétienneté depuis le Nouveau Testament jusqu’à nos jours: le message de Jésus-Christ, le kerygme, la hiérarchie de l’église, l’évolution de la doctrine, le canon des Saintes Écritures, l’Église et l’État, les Saintes Écritures et leur interprétation.
#
FSJ - Etudes interdisciplinaires
ETIN
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
ETIN 101 Efficience cognitive en contexte de diversité Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours présente un survol des sujets, des stratégies et des pratiques reliés au développement affectif et cognitif lié aux compétences individuelles qui facilitent la réussite académique et l’intégration à la vie universitaire. Les sujets explorés incluront, entre autres, les techniques propres à la gestion des études, du temps et du stress, à la communication et à l’interaction avec différentes cultures. Cette formation prépare l’individu à mieux répondre aux défis des études universitaires dans un contexte de diversité.
#
FSJ - Français
FRANC
Faculté Saint-Jean
Notes
(1) La série de cours Français de base est : FRANC 116, 117, 216 et 226.
(2) Les cours de consolidation FRANC 213, 217 et 227 se destinent aux étudiants qui ne disposent pas de la base nécessaire pour satisfaire aux exigences des cours de base.
(3) Affectation par test de placement obligatoire (voir Test obligatoires de français pour tous les étudiants de la Faculté Saint-Jean) pour tous les cours FRANC 116, 216 et 226.
Cours de 1er cycle
FRANC 101 Communication orale et écrite =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 3-0-3). Étude des éléments et des structures de base du français parlé et écrit; identification et mise en pratique de notions élémentaires et de certains schémas de communication. Note: Ce cours se destine aux étudiants qui ne disposent pas de la base nécessaire pour satisfaire aux exigences de FRANC 110 et 111 (French 30 ou l’équivalent) et n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FREN 100.
FRANC 116 Français intermédiaire I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Vise à mettre en place les compétences orales et écrites nécessaires, ie., fondamentales et acquises, par un usage éclectique des méthodes appropriées , notamment actionnelle et inductive, et dans le cadre d’une francophonie multiculturelle. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des créditspour FRANC 110. (2) Affectation par l’évaluation initiale obligatoire. Faire référence à Tests de langue section du calendrier.
FRANC 117 Français intermédiaire II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Vise à mettre en place les compétences orales et écrites nécessaires, ie., fondamentales et acquises, par un usage éclectique des méthodes appropriées, notamment actionnelle et inductive, et dans le cadre d’une francophonie multiculturelle. Préalable: FRANC 116. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 111.
FRANC 140 Communication orale et écrite =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 3-0-3). Étude du français parlé et écrit, par la mise en relation de la langue et de son usage dans un contexte socio-culturel francophone précis. Travaux pratiques d’écoute, de lecture, d’écriture et, surtout, d’expression orale. Préalable(s): French 30 ou l’équivalent, ou FRANC 101 ou FREN 100 ou 111/112. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FREN 150 ou 211/212.
FRANC 213 Apprivoiser la grammaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Étude des usages du français écrit (sans négliger l’oral). Développement de stratégies d’autocorrection. Préalable(s): FRANC 117 ou 216 ou 226. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour FRANC 231.
FRANC 216 Approfondissement du français =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Dernière étape de l’acquisition systématique du français, de tous ses éléments, tant au niveau grammatical et syntaxique, que sur le plan de l’oral et de l’écrit, à l’aide de textes de toutes sortes et favorisant la méthode inductive, toujours dans le cadre d’une francophonie diverse et multiculturelle. Préalable(s): FRANC 117 ou 213 ou affectation par l’évaluation initiale obligatoire (Faire référence à Tests de langue section du calendrier). Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 211.
FRANC 217 Consolidation du français I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Consolidation des éléments travaillés au FRANC 216. Préalable: FRANC 216. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 211.
FRANC 226 Maîtrise du français Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Axé sur les formes d’expression dans la pratique et l’académique, le cours vise à compléter le cheminement qui mène à la maîtrise de la langue française dans toutes ses nuances et complexités, tant à l’oral qu’à l’écrit. Préalable (s): FRANC 213 ou 216 ou 217 ou affectation par l’évaluation initiale obligatoire (Faire référence à Tests de langue section du calendrier). Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 221.
FRANC 227 Consolidation linguistique pour l’éducation et la santé Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-4.5L-0). Consolidation des éléments travaillés au FRANC 226. Préalable: FRANC 226.
FRANC 228 Lire le texte littéraire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est un cours d’introduction à l’analyse du texte littéraire. Il fera connaître différentes approches et méthodologies à travers l’étude d’ouvrages issus des francophonies littéraires du monde. Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 230 Correction phonétique et diction française =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-2L-0). Étude du système phonétique du français dans le but d’améliorer la prononciation. Cours axé sur la pratique s’adressant exclusivement aux étudiants dont le français n’est pas la langue première d’usage. Soumis à l’approbation du professeur. Pratique en groupe et au laboratoire de langues.
FRANC 232 Techniques de rédaction Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Pratique de la rédaction technique, journalistique et de la vulgarisation scientifique. Préalable: FRANC 226.
FRANC 234 Techniques de rédaction - Français langue des affaires Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours vise l’acquisition d’une maîtrise de la langue française spécifique au monde des affaires, afin d’optimiser la communication écrite et orale dans ce domaine, par une consolidation linguistique, méthodologique et rédactionnelle liée au contexte et aux situations du monde des affaires . Préalable(s): *3 FRANC de niveau 200 ou 300. Note : Ce cours est réservé aux étudiants du programme bilingue en administration des affaires.
FRANC 235 Survol de la littérature francophone =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours d’introduction à la littérature en français vise à faire connaître, dans une perspective sociocritique, les noms des grands écrivains et penseurs du monde francophone, leurs idées et la mise en texte de ces idées. Le corpus à l’étude consistera en des oeuvres représentatives à travers les siècles. Ce cours présuppose une bonne connaissance et une maîtrise de la langue française aux plans grammatical, syntaxique et lexical.
FRANC 249 Créativité et jeu dramatique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). La mise en évidence des possibilités créatrices du dialogue et de la nécessité de faire découvrir, par le jeu dramatique, le fond commun et permanent de la langue parlée et de la langue écrite. Pratique de la préparation et de la mise en marche des dramatisations, afin d’explorer la création des diverses formes dramatiques. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en ADRAM 249.
FRANC 302 Théâtres francophones du Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Perspectives contemporaines sur l’évolution du théâtre francophone au Canada. Étude des oeuvres qui ont marqué son histoire et des fonctions de la langue dans les répertoires dramatiques québécois et franco-canadiens. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ADRAM 302. Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 200 parmi FRANC, CAFR, ADRAM, ou l’équivalent.
FRANC 305 Étude historique du français Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Historique du français, du latin au français moderne, en tenant compte des facteurs externes (événements politiques, culturels, etc.) et des facteurs internes (évolution phonétique, syntaxique, etc.). Préalable: LINGQ 200. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour LINGQ 305.
FRANC 310 Lecture à voix haute =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Techniques de lecture à voix haute, exploration des ressources corporelles, vocales, musicales, visuelles et spatiales pour la lecture devant public. Survol historique de la lecture, interprétation de textes divers et procédés de mise en lecture publique. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant suivi ADRAM 310. Préalable(s): *6 de niveau 200 parmi FRANC, ADRAM ou l’équivalent.
FRANC 314 Pratique avancée du français oral et écrit =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 3-0-3). Sensibilisation aux différents moyens d’exprimer une idée. Ce cours a pour but d’aider l’étudiant à mieux structurer sa pensée en français et, ce, à l’oral et à l’écrit. Il se destine à l’étudiant qui voudrait approfondir les connaissances et compétences acquises en FRANC 210 et 211 ou en FREN 252 ou 298.
FRANC 322 Pratique de la dissertation Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). La compréhension, l’analyse et la synthèse d’informations. L’étude et la manipulation du raisonnement logique. La recherche et l’exploitation des arguments. L’élaboration et la mise en forme de la dissertation comme texte clair, cohérent et convaincant. Travaux pratiques. Cours obligatoire pour l’obtention du diplôme de la Faculté. Ce cours présuppose une bonne connaissance et une maîtrise de la langue française aux plans grammatical, syntaxique et lexical. Préalable(s): FRANC 226 ou 227 ou affectation par l’évaluation initiale obligatoire (Faire référence à Tests de langue section du calendrier).
FRANC 324 Introduction aux francophonies littéraires du Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Littératures du Canada francophone, des origines à nos jours, vues à travers un choix d’ oeuvres marquant les diverses périodes de leur évolution. Préalable: FRANC 235. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CA FR 350.
FRANC 330 Introduction aux francophonies littéraires hors-Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Littératures du monde francophone hors-Canada, vues à travers un choix d’oeuvres et d’approches théoriques, notamment les théories postcoloniales.Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 331 Étude avancée du français et de l’anglais I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude comparative des systèmes français et anglais sur les plans syntaxique, morphologique, lexical et sémantique. Introduction à la traduction. Préalable(s): FRANC 221 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FREN 351 ou 352.
FRANC 332 Étude avancée du français et de l’anglais II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude comparative des systèmes français et anglais sur les plans syntaxique, morphologique, lexical et sémantique. Introduction à la traduction, suite. Préalable(s): FRANC 331 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FREN 351 ou 352.
FRANC 333 Littérature et société Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude du traitement littéraire des grands débats de société (médias, politique, rôle social des artistes, etc.) à différentes époques dans les francophonies du monde, à travers un choix d’oeuvres. Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 334 Francophonies et littératures autochtones du Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Littératures écrites ou orales des Autochtones francophones ou historiquement francophones du Canada, vues à travers un choix d’oeuvres marquant leur évolution. Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 335 Francophonies littéraires du monde et discours identitaires Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des façons dont les discours identitaires (sexualité, nationalité, ethnie, gender, etc.) infléchissent la littérature, à travers l’étude d’un choix d’oeuvres littéraires issues de différentes francophonies du monde. Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 336 Littérature des femmes du monde francophone Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude d’un choix d’oeuvres littéraires et critiques écrites par des femmes du monde francophone. Préalable: FRANC 235.
FRANC 340 Sociolinguistique du français Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’étude des liens entre la langue et les facteurs sociaux (région d’origine, statut socioéconomique, genre, etc.) en contexte francophone. Les thèmes abordés incluent la variation régionale et sociale, les registres de langue, le multilinguisme et le contact linguistique. Les notions de théorie sociolinguistique seront illustrées par des exemples tirés de la francophonie canadienne et internationale. Préalable: LINGQ 200. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour LINGQ 340.
FRANC 403 Théâtres francophones contemporains Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Études d’oeuvres dramatiques et de mouvements esthétiques appartenant à divers répertoires francophones contemporains. Préalable(s): 6* de niveau 300 parmi FRANC, CAFR, ADRAM, ETCAN 330 et 332 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits en ADRAM 403 et ADRAM/FRANC 303.
FRANC 410 Traduction du théâtre et de la littérature au Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Initiation à la traduction littéraire et théâtrale. Étude des répertoires traduits d’une langue officielle à l’autre au Canada. Préalable(s) : *6 de niveau 300 ou 400 parmi FRANC, LINGQ. Note : Ce cours exige une bonne connaissance du français et de l’anglais.
FRANC 465 Poésies francophones depuis 1900 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). L’évolution de la poésie française ou francophone, vue à travers un choix d’oeuvres issues des francophonies du monde. Préalable(s): *3 en littérature de niveau 300, préférablement FRANC 324 ou FRANC 330. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CA FR 465.
FRANC 466 Le théâtre canadien-français du XXe siècle =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). L’évolution du théâtre canadien-français de Gratien Gélinas à l’époque contemporaine. Préalable(s): FRANC 235 et *3 en littérature de niveau 300, préférablement CA FR 350. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour ADRAM 466.
FRANC 470 Analyse syntaxique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude approfondie de la structure de la phrase française. Théorie et pratique. Préalable(s): FRANC 226 ou l’équivalent.
FRANC 472 Le roman francophone du Canada depuis 1960 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le roman francophone de la Révolution tranquille jusqu¿aujourd¿hui, vu à travers un choix d’oeuvres. Préalable(s): *3 en littérature de niveau 300, préférablement FRANC 324. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour CA FR 470.
FRANC 480 Choix de sujet Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Préalable(s): FRANC 322 et *3 en littérature ou en langue de niveau 300.
FRANC 482 Francophonies du Canada: Choix de sujet en langue ou en littérature Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Préalable(s): FRANC 228 et *3 en littérature de niveau 300, préférablement FRANC 324 ou *6 en langue française de niveau 300 ou l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
FRANC 485 Francophonies littéraires du monde: Choix de sujet Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Préalable(s): FRANC 228 et *3 en littérature de niveau 300, préférablement FRANC 330 ou l’approbation du Vice- doyen aux affaires académiques.
FRANC 499 Études dirigées Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours viseà permettre aux étudiants d’approfondir un sujet de leur choix en langue française ouen littérature française ou francophone. Préalable(s): *6 en langue française ouen littérature française ou francophone de niveau 300.
Cours de 2e cycle
FRANC 580 Choix de sujet en littérature française ou francophone Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le contenu varie d’une année à l’autre. Les sujets sont annoncés avant la période d’inscription. Préalable(s): FRANC 228, 324, *3 en littérature de niveau 400, ou l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
#
FSJ - Histoire
HISTE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
HISTE 121 Histoire du monde pré-industriel Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours aborde, dans une perspective globale et comparative, les principaux développements économiques, démographiques, politiques et socio-culturels qui ont marqué l’histoire du monde, de 1450 à 1750. Il explique en particulier les échanges et liens qui se sont tissés entre les peuples et les cultures suite aux conquêtes, au commerce et aux migrations. Note: ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour HISTE 120.
HISTE 122 Histoire du monde industrialisé Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours aborde, dans une perspective globale et comparative, les principaux développements économiques, démographiques, politiques et socio-culturels qui ont marqué l’histoire du monde, de 1750 à nos jours. Il explique en particulier comment le monde a été profondément transformé par le phénomène de l’industrialisation. Note: ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour HISTE 120.
HISTE 260 Introduction à l’étude de l’histoire du Canada de 1713 à 1867 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est conçu pour servir de base aux cours de niveau supérieur en histoire canadienne, l’accent étant mis sur le Canada d’expression anglaise, ses relations aux autres groupes (Français, Autochtones et les groupes de la diaspora multiculturelle), la situation des femmes au Canada, l’émigration et l’immigration.
HISTE 261 Introduction à l’étude de l’histoire du Canada de 1867 à nos jours =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est conçu pour servir de base aux cours de niveau supérieur en histoire canadienne et constitue la suite de HISTE 260.
HISTE 303 Construction et identité européennes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours étudie l’émergence et l’évolution de l’idée d’Europe, analyse le processus d’unification européenne (de 1945 à nos jours) dans une perspective avant tout historique et, enfin, propose une réflexion critique sur l’identité européenne. Préalable(s): *3 HISTE de niveau 100 ou 200.
HISTE 311 Histoire de l’Afrique francophone =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude de l’Afrique francophone de la décolonisation à nos jours : le poids de son passé colonial, ses défis politiques, économiques et sociaux, sa place au sein de la francophonie internationale. Préalable(s): *3 HISTE de niveau 100 ou 200.
HISTE 350 Histoire des États-Unis d’Amérique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours est consacré à l’étude de l’histoire des États-Unis, de l’arrivée des premiers colons européens à nos jours. Les dimensions politiques, économiques, sociales et culturelles de l’histoire américaine sont explorées à partir de l’analyse d’une variété de documents historiques et de travaux d’historiens américains. Préalable(s): *3 HISTE de niveau 100 ou 200.
HISTE 360 Choix de sujets en histoire du Canada =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0).
HISTE 366 L’Ouest canadien depuis 1870 =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0).
HISTE 476 Thèmes d’histoire de la francophonie dans l’Ouest canadien =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3s-0). Utilisation des techniques avancées de la recherche documentaire pour étudier l’histoire des francophones dans l’Ouest canadien et plus particulièrement en Alberta. Insistance sur les sources premières des archives et des musées. Préalable: HISTE 260 ou 261.
#
FSJ - Immunologie
IMINE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
IMINE 200 Infection et immunité Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux principes et aux mécanismes d’immunité dans les eucaryotes. Survol des principaux groupes d’agents infectieux (virus, bactéries, parasites); étude de micro-organismes spécifiques par rapport à la réponse de l’hôte aux agents pathogènes, et stratégies d’évasion à ces agents. Préalable(s) ou concomitant(s): BIOCM 200 et MICRB 265. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour BIOCH 450.
#
FSJ - Linguistique
LINGQ
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
LINGQ 200 Introduction à l’étude du langage =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Etude du langage comme phénomène social et individuel. La langue et son fonctionnement.
LINGQ 300 Lexicologie et terminologie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des approches et des techniques en lexicologie et en terminologie. Analyse de ressources documentaires et mises en application.
LINGQ 305 Étude historique du francais Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Historique du français, du latin au français moderne, en tenant compte des facteurs externes (événements politiques, culturels, etc.) et des facteurs internes (évolution phonétique, syntaxique, etc.). Préalable: LINGQ 200. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 305.
LINGQ 320 Phonétique et phonologie du français canadien =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Phonétique et phonologie du français canadien. Préalable(s): LINGQ 200 ou l’équivalent.
LINGQ 340 Sociolinguistique du français Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’étude des liens entre la langue et les facteurs sociaux (région d’origine, statut socioéconomique, genre, etc.) en contexte francophone. Les thèmes abordés incluent la variation régionale et sociale, les registres de langue, le multilinguisme et le contact linguistique. Les notions de théorie sociolinguistique seront illustrées par des exemples tirés de la francophonie canadienne et internationale. Préalable: LINGQ 200. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour FRANC 340.
#
FSJ - Mathématiques
MATHQ
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
MATHQ 100 Calcul élémentaire I Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-1). Les nombres, inéquations, fonctions, géométrie analytique, limite, continuité, dérivées et applications, polynôme de Taylor, fonctions exponentielles et logarithmiques, fonctions trigonométriques inverses et hyperboliques, différentielle et calculs approximatifs. Intégration et théorème fondamental du calcul intégral. Méthode des trapèzes et méthode de Simpson. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1 ou l’équivalent et Mathématiques 31. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 114 (ou 113), MATH 117, 134, 144 ou SCI 100. (2) Ce cours est normalement réservé aux étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering. (3) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *3.5.
MATHQ 101 Calcul élémentaire II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-1). Techniques d’intégration et applications du calcul d’intégrales: calcul de longueurs, aires, volumes et masses, intégrales impropres, équations différentielles ordinaires d’ordre un; séparables, linéaires, méthode d’Euler, applications. Séries infinies, séries de Taylor, séries de puissances et critère de convergence d’une série. Coordonnées polaires, rectangulaires, sphériques et cylindriques dans l’espace de trois dimensions, courbes paramétriques dans le plan et l’espace. Volume et aire d’une surface de révolution. Préalable: MATHQ 100. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 115, MATH 118, 146 ou SCI 100. (2) Ce cours est normalement réservé aux étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering. (3) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *3.5.
MATHQ 102 Algèbre linéaire appliquée Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-1). Vecteurs et matrices; solution d’équations linéaires; équations de lignes et de plans; déterminants; algèbre matricielle; orthogonalité de GramSchmidt et applications; valeurs propres, vecteurs propres et applications; nombres complexes. Préalable ou concomitant: MATHQ 100. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 120, 125, MATH 125 ou 127. (2) Ce cours est normalement réservé aux étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering. (3) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *3.5.
MATHQ 114 Calcul élémentaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Revue de la géométrie analytique. Différentiation de fonctions élémentaires, trigonométriques, exponentielles et logarithmiques. Applications de la dérivée. Intégration. Théorème fondamental du calcul. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 100, 113, MATH 117, 134, 144 ou SCI 100.
MATHQ 115 Calcul élémentaire II Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-0). Fonctions trigonométriques réciproques. Techniques d’intégration. Intégrales impropres. Applications de l’intégrale définie. Introductions aux équations différentielles. Préalable(s): MATHQ 113 ou 114 ou 144 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 101, MATH 118, 146 ou SCI 100.
MATHQ 125 Algèbre linéaire I Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-0). Vecteurs et algèbre matricielle. Déterminantes. Système d’équations linéaires. Espaces vectoriels. Valeurs propres et vecteurs propres. Applications. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 120, MATH 102 ou 127.
MATHQ 160 Arithmétiques pour enseignants =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les concepts étudiés ont pour but d’aider l’enseignant à formuler une idée intuitive des concepts qu’il doit enseigner aux élèves. Nous aborderons la théorie élémentaire du nombre, les systèmes de numération, les ensembles de nombres, la théorie élémentaire de probabilité et les raisonnements inductif et déductif. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1 ou 30-2, ou l’approbation du vice-doyen aux affaires académiques. Note(s): (1) Ce cours est réservé aux étudiants du BEd Élémentaire. (2) Les étudiants en sciences ne peuvent pas obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
MATHQ 214 Calcul intermédiaire I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Séries infinies. Courbes planes et coordonnées polaires. Géométrie analytique à trois dimensions. Dérivées partielles. Préalable(s): MATHQ 101, 115, MATH 118, 146 ou SCI 100 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 209 ou MATH 217.
MATHQ 225 Algèbre linéaire II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Espaces vectoriels. Espaces avec produit scalaire. Exemples d’espace à n dimensions, espace des fonctions continues. Procédé de Gram-Schmidt, factorisation QR, méthode des moindres carrés. Transformations linéaires, changements de base, transformations de similarité et diagonalisation. Diagonalisation orthogonale, formes quadratiques. Applications à une variété de champs, méthodes numériques. Préalable(s): un cours de niveau 100 en algèbre linéaire et Mathématiques 31 ou un autre cours de niveau 100 en calcul. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATH 227.
MATHQ 241 Géométrie Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Géométrie euclidienne de base, congruence, parallélisme, aire et similarité. Développement axiomatique avec emphase sur la résolution de problèmes. Constructions et lieux géométriques, inégalités, maxima et minima, cercles, isométries, et autres sujets. Préalable(s): un cours de MATHQ de niveau 100 ou SCI 100.
MATHQ 334 Introduction aux équations différentielles Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Équations du premier ordre, équations linéaires d’ordre élevé. Solution par séries de puissance. Méthodes de transformée de Laplace. Introduction aux fonctions spéciales. Introduction aux systèmes linéaires. Préalable(s): MATHQ 120 ou 125 ou MATH 127 et un parmi MATHQ 209, 214 ou MATH 217. Concomitant(s): MATHQ 215 ou MATH 317. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MATHQ 201.
MATHQ 363 Histoire des Mathématiques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les thèmes choisis par l’instructeur seront puisés dans les mathématiques anciennes (incluant toutes les cultures), classiques ou modernes et examinés d’un point de vue historique. Préalable(s): deux cours de MATHQ de niveau 100 ou SCI 100.
#
FSJ - Maîtrise ès sciences de l’éducation
M EDU
Faculté Saint-Jean
Les cours M EDU sont réservés aux étudiants inscrits dans un programme de 2e ou de 3e cycle.
Cours de 2e cycle
M EDU 500 Langue, culture et éducation Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude interdisciplinaire (anthropologie, sociologie, psychologie sociale) des théories scientifiques contemporaines sur la nature de la culture, ses rapports avec la langue et ses mécanismes de transmission et de modification. La problématique locale sera examinée dans le contexte de la communauté scientifique internationale. L’histoire de la science de l’éducation bilingue sera aussi abordée. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 512 Enseigner l’écriture selon une approche socioconstructiviste Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours comprend une partie théorique et une partie pratique. Dans la partie théorique, les étudiants auront l’occasion de réfléchir à la notion de texte de qualité en abordant les concepts de cohérence textuelle et de type de texte. Ils approfondiront également leur connaissance du processus d’écriture et de son acquisition ainsi que du fonctionnement cognitif des scripteurs novices et experts. Dans la partie pratique, ils se familiariseront avec une approche socioconstructiviste de l’enseignement de la production écrite et élaboreront une séquence d’apprentissage dans un type de texte donné selon les principes énoncés dans la première partie du cours. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 520 Tendances actuelles en éducation des francophones Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des phénomènes propres à l’éducation des Francophones au Canada selon la pratique et la recherche effectuées dans les diverses provinces: abandon du bilinguisme institutionnel; programmes socio-culturels; innovations en didactique de la langue maternelle. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 521 Tendances actuelles en pédagogie de l’immersion française Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude critique des orientations théoriques et des pratiques actuelles dans la pédagogie de l’immersion française. Analyse de questions importantes dans l’implantation des programmes d’immersion. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 533 L’évaluation en milieu scolaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des différents types d’évaluation utilisés dans le milieu scolaire selon les objectifs poursuivis et les innovations récentes en évaluation. Peut comprendre des sections à distance Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 534 Les troubles du comportement externalisés chez l’enfant Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours vise à initier l’étudiant aux problèmes de comportement de type extériorisé. L’étudiant aura également l’occasion de se familiariser aux courants théoriques contemporains et à l’approche développementale des problèmes extériorisés (agressivité, trouble oppositionnel avec provocation et troubles de la conduite). De même, les thèmes suivants seront présentés : profils et caractéristiques de l’élève ayant des problèmes extériorisés, épidémiologie, étiologie et facteurs d’influence. Enfin, il sera question des facteurs de risque et de protection ainsi que des retombées de ces facteurs sur la gestion et la dynamique de la classe. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery: veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 535 Le trouble déficitaire de l’attention/hyperactivité chez l’élève Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Ce cours vise à initier l’étudiant au trouble déficitaire de l’attention/hyperactivité (TDAH). L’étudiant aura également l’occasion de se familiariser à l’approche neuro-développementale et multimodale du TDAH. De même, les thèmes suivants seront présentés : profils et caractéristiques de l’élève ayant un TDAH, épidémiologie, étiologie et facteurs d’influence. Enfin, il sera question des facteurs de risque et de protection ainsi que des retombées de ces facteurs sur la gestion et la dynamique de la classe. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery: veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 540 Dimensions politiques et administratives de l’éducation bilingue Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des structures de l’éducation française et bilingue dans les diverses provinces canadiennes et du rapport existant entre ces structures et le contexte sociopolitique. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 561 Formation des habiletés de supervision et de leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Principes, organisation et techniques de supervision. Le développement des habiletés de leadership en gestion, particulièrement pour l’éducation en français. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 562 Stage pratique de direction Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Vise à développer des habiletés en observation, en entrevues, en animation de groupes et en réflexion lors de visites dans des écoles et en travaillant avec la direction des écoles.
M EDU 580 Méthodologie de la recherche en éducation I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude du processus de la recherche et des concepts de base de la recherche en éducation. Présentation des divers types de recherches: méthodes de collecte de données et les instruments, analyse et interprétation. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 582 Séminaire de recherche Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Rédaction d’un exposé écrit dans lequel l’étudiant doit tenter de préciser le problème qui est à la source de sa recherche et les objectifs de celle-ci, de situer le sujet étudié dans un cadre de référence général, de formuler la problématique de la recherche. Présentation par l’étudiant d’un exposé écrit. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 583 La recherche et le praticien Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des retombées de la recherche sur la pratique éducative. Méthodologie de la recherche-action, et la formation professionnelle continue des enseignants. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 594 Lectures dirigées Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0).
M EDU 596 Thème ouvert Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 597 Séminaire portant sur l’enseignement au niveau élémentaire et secondaire Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 598 Choix de sujet en éducation Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
M EDU 599 Étude personnelle dirigée Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0).
M EDU 900 Activité de synthèse Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
FSJ - Microbiologie
MICRE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
MICRE 133 Microbiologie Médicale pour Infirmières Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours d’introduction pour les étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). La première partie du cours se concentre sur les microorganismes, le système immunitaire, l’hygiène en milieu hospitalier, la transmission d’infection, les infections, les antibactériens, la désinfection et la stérilisation. La deuxième partie du cours se concentre sur les organismes pathogènes reliés aux systèmes d’organes et comment ils causent la maladie. Note(s): (1) La priorité sera accordée aux étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MMI 133.
#
FSJ - Musique
MUSIQ
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
MUSIQ 100 Les rudiments de la musique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-0). L’étude de la notation musicale et des rudiments de la musique. Introduction à la lecture élémentaire. Note: Les étudiants en BMus ne peuvent pas suivre ce cours. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 100.
MUSIQ 101 Introduction à la musique occidentale I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une étude de la littérature musicale en insistant sur l’audition et les moyens analytiques. Un bref survol historique de la musique occidentale. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 101.
MUSIQ 103 Apprendre la musique et apprendre par la musique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3L-0). Une approche pratique à l’acquisition et au développement de compétences musicales fondamentales pouvant servir d’appui à l’enseignement élémentaire, entre autres dans le domaine de la littératie. Aucune expérience musicale préalable n’est requise.
MUSIQ 124 Musique appliquée =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-0). Leçons de chant individuelles pour les étudiants non inscrits au BMus. Préalable(s): l’approbation du professeur après audition. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 124.
MUSIQ 140 Ensemble choral =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (aux deux semestres, 0-4L-0). Cours de chant choral incluant une participation à la Chorale Saint-Jean. Préalable: l’approbation du professeur après audition. Note(s): (1) Un demi-cours qui s’étale sur les deux semestres. (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 140.
MUSIQ 210 Formation Musicale I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). L’étude des principes de base de la théorie et de l’écriture musicale à travers des exercices de solfège, d’analyse et d’écriture. Principes de l’enchainement des accords, de la conduite des voix, de l’écriture mélodique et du contrepoint à 2 voix. Structures des phrases et thèmes. Introduction au piano. Préalable(s): MUSIQ 100 ou MUSIC 100 ou l’équivalent vérifiable par un test de classement. Note(s): (1) les étudiants qui possèdent une formation musicale élémentaire peuvent suivre MUSIQ 100 et MUSIQ 210 en même temps avec la permission expresse du professeur. (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIQ 151, 155 ou MUSIC 151 et 155.
MUSIQ 211 Formation Musicale II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Approfondissement et application des concepts appris en MUSIQ 210 à l’harmonie plus complexe et aux genres populaires. Harmonisation de mélodies simples au piano. Les petites formes. Préalable: MUSIQ 210. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIQ 151, 155 ou MUSIC 151 et 155.
MUSIQ 215 La musique au Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Panorama de l’histoire et des littératures musicales du Canada à travers une sélection de thèmes et de genres. Préalable: un cours MUSIQ/MUSIC de niveau 100 ou la permission du professeur. Ce cours n’est pas ouvert aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 215 ou MUSIC 314.
MUSIQ 224 Musique appliquée =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-0). Leçons de chant individuelles pour les étudiants non inscrits au BMus. Préalable(s): MUSIQ 124 ou l’équivalent et l’approbation du professeur. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 224.
MUSIQ 240 Ensemble choral =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (aux deux semestres, 0-4L-0). Cours de chant choral. Préalable(s): l’approbation du professeur après audition. Note : Un demi-cours qui s’étale sur les deux semestres. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 240.
MUSIQ 301 Musique et société Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Choix de thématiques explorant la musique en tant que phénomène socio-culturel et pratique sociale. Les mécanismes sociaux qui entourent la production musicale, les phénomènes de genres, de styles et d’identité. Préalable : un cours de MUSIQ/MUSIC de niveau 100 ou la permission du professeur. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour SCSOC 301.
MUSIQ 315 Introduction à l’art de diriger =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Préalable(s): MUSIQ 210 et 211 (ou MUSIQ 151 et 156), ou l’équivalent.
MUSIQ 424 Musique appliquée =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-0). Leçons de chant individuelles pour les étudiants non inscrits au BMus. Préalable(s) : MUSIQ 224 ou l’équivalent et l’approbation du professeur. Note : Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 424.
MUSIQ 440 Ensemble choral =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (aux deux semestres, 0-4L-0). Cours de chant choral. Préalable(s): l’approbation du professeur après audition. Note : Un demi-cours qui s’étale sur les deux semestres. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 440.
MUSIQ 524 Musique Appliquée (Chant) =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-0). Leçons de chant individuelles pour les étudiants non inscrits au BMus. Préalable(s) : MUSIQ 424 ou l’équivalent et l’approbation du professeur. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour MUSIC 524.
#
FSJ - Philosophie
PHILE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
PHILE 125 Raisonnement et pensée critique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Acquisition de compétences fondamentales en raisonnement et analyse critique des argumentations par l’étude des types d’argumentation, des structures logiques, des critères employés dans l’évaluation des arguments et des sophismes. La matière du cours inclura une initiation à la méthode philosophique, à la recherche documentaire et à la rédaction d’un travail scientifique.
PHILE 141 Introduction à la philosophie occidentale =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux principaux problèmes et théories qui ont dominé la philosophie occidentale par l’étude et la discussion critique de quelques pensées majeures, notamment Platon, Aristote, Descartes et Hume. Note: ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHILE 140.
PHILE 142 Introduction aux philosophies non occidentales =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude centrée sur des pensées et des cultures non occidentales, principalement, mais non exclusivement, chinoise, africaine, arabe et indienne, par l’entremise de textes originaux ou d’autres représentations possibles. Ce cours permettra ainsi de mieux reconnaître la valeur et les limites des conceptions occidentales et de s’exercer au dialogue entre les cultures.
PHILE 386 La bioéthique =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Regard philosophique sur les problèmes majeurs de la bioéthique. Exemples: les droits et les devoirs du personnel hospitalier et du patient, l’euthanasie active et passive, le droit à la vie et l’avortement, la recherche et l’expérimentation en médecine humaine et animale, la manipulation génétique.
#
FSJ - Physiologie
PHYSE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
PHYSE 152 Physiologie Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 5-0-0). Introduction à la physiologie humaine. Doit être complété avant l’année 2 du BScInf (bilingue). Note(s): (1) Ce cours est réservé aux étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour NURS 150 ou 151.
PHYSE 210 Physiologie humaine Œ6 (fi 12) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 6-0-0). Cours d’introduction à la physiologie humaine. Préalable(s): BIOLE 107 ou 108, *6 de CHIM. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSE 152, PHYSL 210, ou PHYSL 212 et 214.
#
FSJ - Physique
PHYSQ
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
PHYSQ 124 Particules et ondes Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-3). Cours basé sur l’algèbre, principalement pour les étudiants en sciences de la vie, de la santé et de l’environnement. Le cours décrit deux types de mouvements: la matière (particules) et les ondes. Vecteurs, forces, corps en équilibre, révision de cinématique et dynamique, conservation de la quantité de mouvement et de l’énergie, mouvement circulaire. Vibrations, ondes élastiques dans la matière, son, optique ondulatoire. Radiation du corps noir, photons, ondes de de Broglie. L’accent sera mis sur des applications dans les sciences de la vie, de la santé et de l’environnement. Préalable(s): Physique 20 ou l’équivalent et Mathématiques 30-1. Physique 30 est fortement recommandé. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSQ 131, PHYS 144, EN PH 131 ou SCI 100.
PHYSQ 126 Fluides, champs et radiation Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-3). Suite de PHYSQ 124, principalement pour les étudiants en sciences de la vie, de la santé et de l’environnement. Statique et dynamique des fluides. Électrostatique, courants et circuits, champs magnétiques, induction électromagnétique. Radiation nucléaire, son interaction avec la matière et ses applications. Préalable(s): PHYSQ 124 ou PHYS 144. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSQ 130, PHYS 146 ou SCI 100.
PHYSQ 130 Ondes, optique et son Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-3/2). Optique géométrique, instruments d’optique, oscillations, ondes, son, interférence, diffraction. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1, Mathématiques 31, Physique 30. Concomitant(s): MATHQ 100 ou 114 (ou 113) ou MATH 114 ou 117 ou l’équivalent. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSQ 126, PHYS 146. (2) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *3.8.
PHYSQ 131 Mécanique Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-1s-3/2). Cinématique et dynamique des particules; gravitation; travail et énergie; moments linéaire et angulaire; systèmes de particules; dynamique des corps rigides. Préalable(s): MATHQ 100 ou 114 (ou 113), PHYSQ 130. Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering doivent avoir suivi ENGG 130. Concomitant(s): MATHQ 115 ou MATH 101. Note(s): (1) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSQ 124, PHYS 144 ou EN PH 131. (2) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *4.3.
PHYSQ 208 Aspects de la physique moderne Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Contradictions expérimentales de la physique classique; théorie de la relativité restreinte d’Einstein: contraction des longueurs, dilatation du temps, paradoxe des jumeaux, équivalence de l’énergie et de la masse, énergie et quantité de mouvement relativistes; physique quantique: effet photoélectrique, effet Compton, production de rayons X et diffraction des électrons, principe d’indétermination de Heisenberg; équation de Schrödinger et applications à des potentiels de puits et barrières à une dimension, effet tunnel, oscillateur harmonique simple; physique atomique: atome d’hydrogène, table périodique. Préalable(s): un parmi PHYSQ 124, PHYS 144 ou PHYSQ 131, et un parmi PHYSQ 126, PHYS 146 ou PHYSQ 130, et un parmi MATHQ 114 (ou 113) ou MATH 144. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYSQ 271.
PHYSQ 230 Électricité et magnétisme Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-3/2). Champs électriques, loi de Gauss; potentiel électrique; condensateurs et diélectriques; courant électrique et résistance; champs magnétiques; loi d’Ampère; loi de Faraday; inductance; propriétés magnétiques de la matière. Préalable(s): PHYSQ 130 ou PHYS 146 et MATHQ 100 ou 114 (ou 113) ou MATH 114 ou 117. Préalable(s) ou concomitant(s): MATHQ 101 ou 115 ou MATH 118. SCI 100 peut remplacer PHYS 146, MATH 114 et MATHQ 115. Note(s): (1) Les étudiants de la Faculty of Engineering qui suivent ce cours obtiendront *3.8. (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYS 281.
PHYSQ 261 Physique de l’énergie et de l’environnement Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Diverses formes d’énergie; conservation de l’énergie. Principes de thermodynamique; gaz parfaits; transitions de phase; pompes à chaleur et réfrigérateurs. Transfert de chaleur. Consommation de ressources énergétiques. Physique nucléaire; radioactivité; fission, énergie nucléaire. Énergie de remplacement et sources d’énergie renouvelable. Préalable(s): un parmi PHYSQ 124, PHYS 144 ou PHYSQ 131, et un parmi PHYSQ 126, PHYS 146 ou PHYSQ 130, et MATHQ 113 ou MATH 114 ou 144.
PHYSQ 271 Introduction à la physique moderne Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Contradictions expérimentales de la physique classique: relativité restreinte, quantification de la charge, de la lumière et de l’énergie. Corps noir, effet photoélectrique, effet Compton. Modèles atomiques, propriétés ondulatoires des particules, principe d’incertitude. Équation de Schrödinger, puits carrés infinis et finis, oscillateur harmonique, effet tunnel, atome d’hydrogène. Moment cinétique orbital et spin de l’électron, spin et statistique. Autres thèmes choisis. Préalable(s): un parmi PHYSQ 124, PHYS 144 ou PHYSQ 131, et un parmi PHYSQ 126, PHYS 146 ou PHYSQ 130. Préalable(s) ou concomitant(s): MATHQ 209 ou 215 ou MATH 317 ou l’équivalent. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PHYS 208.
#
FSJ - Psychologie
PSYCE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle Domaine des Arts
PSYCE 105 Comportement social et individuel =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-1/4). Introduction à l’étude de l’individualité humaine, de la personnalité et des processus sociaux. Le cours peut inclure l’étude de quelques aspects du développement humain normal et anormal, du jugement et du traitement psychologiques. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
PSYCE 106 Principes psychologiques pour les infirmières Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Principes et processus psychologiques pertinents aux sciences infirmières incluant les devis et l’analyse de la recherche, le développement au cours de la vie, les processus cognitifs et de mémoire, les processus socio-psychologiques, la personnalité, les troubles psychologiques et leur traitement. Note(s): (1) La priorité sera accordée aux étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PSYCE 104, 105; PSYCO 104, 105 ou 106; SCI 100.
PSYCE 223 Psychologie de la croissance =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Les aspects biologiques, cognitifs et sociaux du développement psychologique au cours de la petite enfance, de l’enfance et de l’adolescence. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 et 105 ou l’équivalent ou SCI 100 .
PSYCE 239 Psychopathologie =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction générale à l’historique, à la classification, au diagnostic etau traitement des troubles psychopathologiques. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100 et PSYCE 105. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayantou postulantdes crédits pour PSYCE 339.
PSYCE 241 Psychologie sociale =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux théories et à la recherche sur l’individu dans un contexte social. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100 et PSYCE 105 ou l’équivalent. Note: PSYCE 241 et SOC 241 ne peuvent pas être suivis tous les deux pour crédits.
PSYCE 333 Psychologie de la personnalité =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux différentes approches théoriques et à la recherche dans le domaine de la personnalité. Préalable(s): PSYCE 223, 239 ou 241. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PSYCE 233.
PSYCE 498 Étude personnelle II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours destiné à permettre aux étudiants au niveau du baccalauréat d’approfondir personnellement un sujet de leur choix. Sous forme de bibliographie dirigée ou de travaux de laboratoire. Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 300 en psychologie et l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
Domaine des Sciences
PSYCE 104 Procédés psychologiques de base =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-1/4). Principes et développement de la perception, motivation, apprentissage et réflexion et leur relation avec le fonctionnement psychologique de l’individu. Ce cours est un préalable pour la plupart des cours de psychologie et est normalement suivi de PSYCE 105. Peut comprendre des sections Alternative Delivery; veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire.
PSYCE 258 Psychologie cognitive =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une introduction à l’étude des processus cognitifs. Les principaux sujets abordés: la perception, l’attention, la représentation des connaissances, la mémoire, l’apprentissage, le langage, le raisonnement, et la résolution de problèmes. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100 et un parmi STATQ 151 ou SCSOC 322 ou SCI 151.
PSYCE 275 Cerveau et comportement =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à la fonction du cerveau et à son rapport à la sensation, à la perception, au mouvement, à l’apprentissage, à la motivation et à la pensée. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100, STAT 141 ou STATQ 151 ou SCI 151 et Biologie 30 ou l’équivalent.
PSYCE 282 Modification du comportement Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux bases théoriques des principales techniques en modification du comportement, les principaux courants de recherche et les applications aux troubles du comportement en milieu scolaire, clinique et social. Préalable(s): PSYCE 104 ou SCI 100. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PSYCE 281.
PSYCE 367 Perception =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Une introduction aux théories et à la recherche dans le domaine de la perception. Préalable(s): PSYCE 258 ou 275. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour PSYCE 267.
PSYCE 377 Neuropsychologie humaine Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à la neuropsychologie et à l’organisation fonctionnelle du cerveau. Dommages cérébraux et leurs effets sur les fonctions mentales, le langage et le comportement moteur. Préalable: PSYCE 275.
PSYCE 381 Principes de l’apprentissage Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Principes et processus de l’apprentissage, dont le conditionnement classique, l’apprentissage instrumental et la mémoire. L’accent sera sur la recherche impliquant des animaux. Préalable(s): STAT 141 ou STATQ 151 ou SCI 151 et PSYCE 281 ou 282.
PSYCE 458 Psychologie avancée de la cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude plus approfondie d’un ou de plusieurs thèmes dans le domaine de la cognition humaine. Préalable: PSYCE 258.
PSYCE 496 Étude personnelle I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 1-0-3). Cours destiné à permettre aux étudiants d’approfondir personnellement un sujet de leur choix (ce que le cadre d’un cours ne permet pas). Préalable(s): *3 de niveau 300 en psychologie et l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
#
FSJ - Science politique
SC PO
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
SC PO 101 Introduction au gouvernement =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-0). Une introduction aux institutions gouvernementales du Canada et d’ailleurs. Sujets étudiés: constitutions, assemblées législatives, organes exécutifs, fonction publique, cours de justice, gouvernement fédéral et d’autres sujets choisis. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour POL S 100 ou 103.
SC PO 102 Introduction à la politique Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 3-0-0). Une introduction aux concepts et enjeux des phénomènes politiques. Sujets étudiés: pouvoir ou influence, démocratie, droits et libertés, idéologie politique, opinion publique, élections, partis politiques, groupes de pression et autres sujets choisis. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour POL S 100 ou 103.
SC PO 225 Gouvernement du Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse des structures du gouvernement du Canada : le fédéralisme, la Constitution, les Communes, le Sénat, le Cabinet, la Cour suprême, la fonction publique. Préalable(s): SC PO 101 ou 102 ou POL S 101. Note: ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour SC PO 220 et pour POL S 220.
SC PO 226 Politique au Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des questions politiques au Canada comme la culture politique, le multiculturalisme ou encore la question autochtone, la place du Québec, de la mondialisation et des relations avec les États-Unis; analyse des partis politiques, des groupes de pression et des mouvements sociaux, des médias. Préalable(s): SC PO 101 ou 102 ou POL S 101. Note : ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour SC PO 220 et pour POL S 220.
SC PO 261 Relations internationales I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction au rôle de l’État au sein du système international ayant pour but de développer une connaissance des événements contemporains internationaux. Ce cours couvre la nature de la politique étrangère et la dynamique d’interaction entre les États. Préalable(s): SC PO 101 ou SC PO 102 ou POL S 101.
SC PO 262 Relations internationales II Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction aux problèmes contemporains de relations internationales ayant pour but de développer une connaissance du système international. Ce cours porte sur le rôle des institutions internationales, des acteurs supra étatiques et non-étatiques, ainsi que certains enjeux liés à la mondialisation.
SC PO 270 Politique comparée Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à des thèmes de politique comparée.
SC PO 320 La politique du système de santé au Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le développement du système de santé canadien, ses composantes législatives et philosophiques ainsi que son financement et son organisation; l’étude comparative des défis au système de santé canadien posés par les enjeux financiers, l’accès universel et les modes alternatifs. Note(s): (1) La priorité sera accordée aux étudiants du BScInf (bilingue). (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour POL S 321 ou 322.
SC PO 428 Gouvernement et politique des provinces Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Etude des structures, des fonctions et des processus de certains gouvernements provinciaux au Canada. Préalable(s): SC PO 225 ou 226 ou POL S 220.
Cours de 2e cycle
SC PO 499 Choix de sujets en science politique Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours dont le contenu varie d’une année à l’autre. Les sujets sont annoncés avant la période d’inscription. Préalable: l’approbation du Vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
#
FSJ - Sciences sociales
SCSOC
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
SCSOC 225 Méthodes de recherche en sciences sociales Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Initiation à quelques notions d’épistémologie concernant les sciences sociales et à quelques méthodes de recherche; principaux critères de la méthode scientifique et distinction avec les sciences exactes; construction des hypothèses et analyse conceptuelle; planification de la recherche et utilisation des documents; techniques de l’entrevue participante, de l’échantillonnage et de l’analyse de contenu. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour SCSOC 321 ou SOC 315.
SCSOC 301 Musique et société Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Choix de thématiques explorant la musique en tant que phénomène socio-culturel et pratique sociale. Les mécanismes sociaux qui entourent la production musicale, les phénomènes de genres, de styles et d’identité. Préalable: un cours de MUSIQ/MUSIC de niveau 100 ou la permission du professeur. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits pour MUSIQ 301.
SCSOC 311 Histoire de la pensée politique et sociale I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Survol historique et critique du développement de la pensée politique et sociale, de l’Antiquité à la Renaissance, en utilisant des textes choisis de quelques philosophes présocratiques (Héraclite, Parménide), Platon, Aristote, Boèce, Abélard, Thomas d’Aquin, Machiavel, Erasme.
SCSOC 312 Histoire de la pensée politique et sociale II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude des principaux aspects de la pensée politique et sociale du XVIIe siècle à nos jours, centrée sur l’évolution du libéralisme, de ses différentes tendances et des réactions d’opposition qu’il a suscitées. Seront abordées les oeuvres de Hobbes, Locke, Montesquieu, Rousseau, Voltaire, Payne, Adam Smith, Tocqueville, Marx, Weber, Durkheim et Louis Hartz.
SCSOC 322 Statistiques pour les sciences sociales =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-2). Application des méthodes statistiques à certains problèmes en sciences sociales. Interprétation des données en termes de moyennes, de mesures de variabilité et de mesures de relation: études de la théorie de l’échantillonnage et des tests d’hypothèses statistiques. Préalable(s): Mathématiques 30-1 et SCSOC 225. Note(s): (1) Ce cours faisait partie de SCSOC 320. (2) Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour un cours de STAT ou STATQ ou SCI 151.
SCSOC 499 Choix de sujets en sciences sociales Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Cours dont le contenu varie d’une année à l’autre. Les sujets sont annoncés avant la période d’inscription. Préalable: l’approbation du vice-doyen aux affaires académiques.
#
FSJ - Sciences socio-politiques
SCSP
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
SCSP 520 Mémoire de Sciences socio-politiques Œ6 (fi 12) (aux deux semestres, 0-3s-0). Préparation du mémoire requis en quatrième année du programme de spécialisation en Sciences socio-politiques.
#
FSJ - Sociologie
SOCIE
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
SOCIE 100 Introduction à la sociologie =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Examen de la théorie, des méthodes et de la substance de la sociologie. Étude de la façon dont les sociétés comprennent la culture, la socialisation, la déviance, la stratification et les groupes. Le procès de transformation sociale par les mouvements sociaux, l’industrialisation, etc. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant des crédits en SOCIE 300.
SOCIE 260 Inégalité et stratification sociales =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’étude des inégalités sociales structurées et de la pauvreté; approches théoriques majeures; conclusions des études empiriques clés, en mettant l’accent sur le Canada. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
SOCIE 269 Sociologie de la mondialisation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction à l’analyse critique des transformations de l’économie-monde et de leurs impacts économiques, politiques, sociaux et culturels. La mondialisation comme fait social, les acteurs de la mondialisation, les discours pro-anti- et alter-mondialisation. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
SOCIE 270 Sociologie des organisations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction au concept d’organisation. Exploration de quelques théories et concepts, tels que les formes organisationnelles et règles qui les régissent, l’identité au travail, la culture d’entreprise, l’environnement organisationnel, le système d’autorité et de pouvoir, la division du travail, etc. Préalable(s): SOCIE 100 ou équivalent.
SOCIE 301 Sociologie des rapports de sexes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Étude comparée des rapports entre les femmes et les hommes dans certaines sociétés, en mettant l’accent sur le Canada contemporain; étude des rôles spécifiques à chaque sexe, et des théories relatives à leurs origines; recherche sociologique récente sur l’importance de la division sexuelle de la société. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
SOCIE 348 Sociologie des média et de l’information =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). La place des média et des nouvelles technologies de l’information dans la société contemporaine. Étude des théories qui s’y rattachent, avec l’accent sur les débats entourant la question de la postmodernité. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
SOCIE 368 Étude des minorités et des groupes ethniques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse de processus sociaux qui permettent le développement et la compréhension du statut des minorités. Étude de cas des relations entre les groupes ethniques et minoritaires fondée sur les travaux réalisés à l’échelle nationale. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
SOCIE 371 La famille =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Le système familial vu dans le contexte de l’histoire et de la rencontre des cultures. Étude du système familial dans les sociétés contemporaines, soulignant les aspects caractéristiques de l’institution et ses tendances actuelles.
SOCIE 412 Sociologie du développement =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Analyse critique des enjeux de développement dans l’économie mondiale et le système interétatique; analyse de différents aspects des sociétés en voie de développement: régimes agraires et monde rural; stratégies d’industrialisation; marché du travail (secteur formel/informel); clivages sociaux (classes, castes, ethnies); conflits intercommunautaires; état (bureaucraties, régimes, politiques sociales); approche comparative interrégionale. Préalable: SOCIE 100.
#
FSJ - Statistique
STATQ
Faculté Saint-Jean
Cours de 1er cycle
STATQ 151 Introduction à la statistique appliquée I Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 3-0-0). Collecte de données et leur présentation, statistiques descriptives. Loi de probabilité, distribution d’échantillonnage et théorème limite central, estimation ponctuelle et tests d’hypothèses. Corrélation et régression linéaire simple. Mesure d’ajustement et tableaux de contingences. Préalable: Mathématiques 30-1. Note: Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour un cours de STAT, KIN 109, PSYCO 211, SCSOC 322, SOC 210, ou SCI 151.
#
Gender and Social Justice
GSJ
Women’s and Gender Studies Faculty of Arts
Graduate Courses
GSJ 500 Directed Reading in Gender and Social Justice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GSJ 501 Praxis Workshop Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). In addition to attendance at the Feminist Research Speakers Series, students will explore feminist approaches to Community Service- Learning (CSL) and complete 20 hours of CSL work.
GSJ 502 Research Workshop Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). In addition to attendance at the Feminist Research Speakers Series, students will examine interdisciplinary approaches to feminist scholarship, and prepare and develop their thesis or research project proposals.
GSJ 503 Approaches to Gender and Social Justice Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of interdisciplinary approaches to feminist scholarship with an emphasis on critical analysis and knowledge production for social justice.
GSJ 504 Feminist Cultural Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines gender as a category of analysis in contemporary cultural theory in order to examine how gendered subjects are produced and regulated through everyday cultural practices.
GSJ 505 Gendering Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines the intersections of gender and international development with particular emphasis on feminist discourses of international development history, theory, and practices.
GSJ 506 Feminist Legal Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An advanced examination of feminist legal theories and strategies with an emphasis on the contemporary North American and British context. Topics will vary.
GSJ 507 Feminist Theory Now Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines current preoccupations within feminist theory. Topics and geographical focus will vary.
GSJ 508 Feminist Historiography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines contemporary and historical approaches to writing feminist histories of a variety of regions and time periods.
GSJ 520 Law and Feminism in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A focus on the fundamentally contradictory role of law for women in Canada, building on the insights offered by feminist cross- disciplinary legal scholarship. (Not open to students with credit in WGS 420.)
GSJ 531 Feminism and Sexual Assault Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Interdisciplinary consideration of conceptual, political, and legal strategies that feminists have deployed to confront sexual coercion with an emphasis on the contemporary North American context. (Not open to students with credit in WGS 431.)
GSJ 540 Body Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of contemporary theoretical approaches to bodies and embodiment, with particular emphasis on the ways that race, class, sexuality, gender, and (dis)ability shape bodily experiences. (Not open to students with credit in WGS 440.)
GSJ 555 Feminism and Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Ways in which pro-feminist women and men have constructed religious ideologies that are supportive of women’s power and agency. (Not open for students with credit in WGS 455.)
GSJ 560 Masculinities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course surveys the status of masculinity and the emergence of contemporary masculinity studies within, alongside and, at times, against feminism and Women’s Studies. (Not open to students with credit in WGS 460.)
GSJ 570 Sexualities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Special Topics: This course offers advanced examination of selected issues in sexuality studies. (Not open to students with credit in WGS 470.)
GSJ 598 Special Topics - Topics in Gender and Social Justice Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Special topics will vary.
GSJ 599 Special Topics in Feminist Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course offers advanced study of selected issues in current feminist theorizing (Not open to students with credit in WGS 499.)
GSJ 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). Capping project.
#
Genetics (Biological Sciences)
GENET
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Biology (BIOL); Botany (BOT); Entomology (ENT); Microbiology (MICRB); Zoology (ZOOL).
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
GENET 270 Foundations of Molecular Genetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1.5s-0). Basic concepts on the organization of genetic material and its expression will be developed from experiments on bacteria and viruses. Prerequisite: BIOL 207.
GENET 301 Organization of Simple Genomes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Two models of simple genomes will be examined. One model will focus on the function and transmission of mitochondrial DNA, the evolution of mitochondria, and the role of mitochondria in human disease and aging. The other model will focus on the application of genomics, molecular biology, and cell biology to understand chromosome structure, DNA replication, cell division, and cell-cell communication in yeast. Prerequisite: GENET 270.
GENET 302 Organization of Complex Genomes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Use of current genomics in Eukaryote genome sequencing projects, their implications and DNA sequence organization. Also covered are the influence of various chromatin configurations on gene expression, techniques for manipulating animal genomes, epigenetic phenomena, and regulation of the cell cycle. Prerequisite GENET 270.
GENET 304 Gene Expression and its Regulation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The molecular biology of the processes by which the base sequence of genes is expressed as cellular phenotype will be examined. Emphasis will be placed upon the similarities and differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes and upon the mechanisms that regulate the operation of particular genes. Prerequisite: GENET 270.
GENET 305 Genetic Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Analysis of gene functions in animal model systems. Mutational analysis; gene dosage; chromosome mechanics; transgenics; forward and reverse screens; dominant modifier screens; epistasis; genetic mosaics, meiotic recombination. Prerequisite: GENET 270. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 275 and 305.
GENET 364 Plant Genetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course examines in detail: how to induce mutations in plants by means of chemicals and transgenes; how to use mutagenized and transgenic plant populations for forward and reverse genetic approaches; how to molecularly identify genes defined by mutations in plants; how to infer gene functions and genetic interactions from single and double-mutant phenotypes, respectively, with emphasis on genetic redundancy and functional compensation; and how to visualize gene expression and protein localization with fluorescent proteins. Prerequisite: GENET 270.
GENET 375 Introduction to Molecular Genetics Techniques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-1s-6). A laboratory course in which students will be introduced to modern techniques in molecular genetics. These may include cytogenetics, recombinant DNA techniques, PCR, DNA sequencing, methods of detecting gene expression, and genome analysis. Prerequisites: GENET 270, MICRB 265, and a 300-level GENET course. Enrolment is limited, and registration is by consent of instructor.
GENET 390 Gene Manipulation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Examination of fundamental techniques employed in molecular biological research relevant to both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. Topics will provide the theoretical basis appropriate for molecular research in a diverse range of fields including genetics, microbiology, cell biology, biotechnology, evolution and population biology. Prerequisite: BIOL 207; BIOCH 200 or 205 or BIOCH 220; GENET 270 recommended.
GENET 408 Replication, Repair, and Recombination =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). The goal of the course is to build a foundation of information in the topics of DNA replication, recombination, and repair and to apply this information to understanding the molecular basis of certain human diseases including cancer. Prerequisites: Any two GENET 300-level lecture courses; this course is normally recommended for fourth-year students. GENET 408 and 508 cannot both be taken for credit.
GENET 412 Genetic Control of Animal Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Gene action during development; identification and analysis of the networks of genetic elements regulating developmental decisions. The course will focus on processes that have been elucidated from genetically tractable and model systems. Prerequisites: any two GENET 300-level lecture courses, or any GENET 300-level lecture course and ZOOL 303. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 412 and 512.
GENET 415 Current Topics in Bacterial Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The goal of the course is to build knowledge about conserved, fundamental cellular processes uncovered using genetic approaches to study bacteria and to develop an appreciation for the application of this information to the development of technology and the understanding of human diseases. Prerequisites: Two GENET 300 level courses or MICRB 316 and one GENET 300 level course; this course is normally recommended for fourth-year students. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 415 and 515.
GENET 418 Human Genetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). A survey of human genetic variation and mutation in a molecular genetics context. Molecular basis of diseases and applications to genetic counseling and screening, chromosomal abnormalities, genomic imprinting, cancer genetics, gene mapping, population genetics, multifactorial inheritance, gene therapy, and ethical issues. Prerequisites: any two GENET 300-level lecture courses, GENET 302 is recommended. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 418 and 518.
GENET 420 Research Techniques in Molecular Genetics =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-1s-12). A laboratory course teaching modern techniques in molecular biology with emphasis on the analysis of gene expression in animal systems. Prerequisites: GENET 390 and any other GENET 300-level lecture course. GENET 375 recommended. Enrolment is limited and registration is by consent of instructor. Designed for senior undergraduate and graduate students in programs with molecular biological orientation. May not be taken concurrently with BIOL 391.
GENET 422 Current Topics in Developmental Genetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in developmental biology with an emphasis on the cellular and genetic mechanisms used to uncover regulatory pathways. Selection of topics will depend, in part, on the interests of the students enrolled. Peer evaluation will be an integral part of the course and an introduction to the review process in science will be included. Critical reading and analysis of the primary literature, research proposal-based reading and writing, and classroom presentation skills may all be used as means of evaluation. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and GENET 412 or ZOOL 303 or equivalent course in developmental biology.
GENET 424 Ethical Issues in Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). A seminar and discussion course where students will use their existing knowledge of genetics to investigate, evaluate, and discuss how the field of genetics affects society. Students participate in classroom presentations, written submissions and discussions that may include medical research ethics, genetically modified organisms (GMOs), gene patenting, and other current topics. Enrollment is limited and is by permission of the instructor(s). Prerequisite: Any two GENET 300-level lecture courses.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee: BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415, NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
GENET 500 Advanced Genetic Analysis I: The Genetic System Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-0). Directed study of literature on the discovery of the phenomena of inheritance and their physical correlates within the cell. Notes: (1) Graded on participation in group discussions and on written work and/or examinations based on assigned readings. (2) Scheduling of this course will be subject to modification depending on the requirements of instructors and students. Note: Usually taken as one of a pair of courses (GENET 500, 510) by first year graduate students in the area of Genetics. Students in other graduate programs may register with the consent of the instructors.
GENET 508 Graduate Course in Replication, Repair and Recombination Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). The goal of the course is to build a foundation of information in the topics of DNA replication, recombination, and repair and to apply this information to understanding the molecular basis of certain human diseases including cancer. Scheduled classes are the same as GENET 408, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 408 and 508.
GENET 510 Advanced Topics in Gene Regulation, Development and Medical Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-3s-0). Directed study of literature on regulation of the phenotypic expression of genes and the manner in which genes direct the process of development. Note: See GENET 500.
GENET 512 Advanced Genetic Control of Animal Development Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Gene action during development; identification and analysis of the network of genetic elements regulating developmental decisions. The course will focus on processes that have been elucidated from genetically tractable and model systems. Scheduled classes are the same as GENET 412, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 412 and 512.
GENET 515 Advanced Current Topics in Bacterial Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The goal of the course is to build knowledge about conserved, fundamental cellular processes uncovered using genetic approaches to study bacteria and to develop an appreciation for the application of this information to the development of technology and the understanding of human diseases. Scheduled classes are the same as GENET 415, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 415 and 515.
GENET 518 Advanced Human Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). A survey of human genetic variation and mutation in a molecular genetics context. Molecular basis of diseases and applications to genetic counseling and screening, chromosomal abnormalities, genomic imprinting, cancer genetics, gene mapping, population genetics, multifactorial inheritance, gene therapy, and ethical issues. Scheduled classes are the same as GENET 418, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both GENET 418 and 518.
GENET 601 Genetics Seminars Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0).
GENET 605 Invited Speaker Seminar Series Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0).
#
Geophysics
GEOPH
Department of Physics Faculty of Science
Note: Not all Geophysics courses are offered every year. Students are advised to consult the Department of Physics regarding the courses that will be available in a given year. GEOPH 436, the geophysics field school, is normally held in the week prior to the start of Fall term, and is required for Honors and Specialisation Geophysics programs. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
Graduate students may not take GEOPH 421 or 438 for credit.
Undergraduate Courses
GEOPH 110 Introduction to Geophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to both whole Earth geophysics and commercial exploration geophysics. Topics include: earthquakes, seismology, gravity and the shape of the Earth, plate tectonics, atmospheric and space physics, geomagnetic field, geochronology, geoelectricity, geothermal studies, comparison of Earth with other planets, Sun-Earth interactions, and discussion of geophysics as a career. Prerequisites: Physics 20 and Mathematics 30. Note: Credit will be given for only one of GEOPH 110 or 210.
GEOPH 210 Physics of the Earth =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Structure and evolution of the Earth from a physics- based perspective; use of geophysical data (gravity, magnetic, seismic, thermal, geoelectric) to determine the internal structure of the Earth; dynamics of the Earth, including plate tectonics, mantle convection and the geodynamo; geohazards, volcanoes, earthquakes and magnetic storms; temporal variations in climate and sea level. Prerequisites: one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146; one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Note: credit will be given for only one of GEOPH 110 or GEOPH 210.
GEOPH 223 Environmental Geophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Near surface geophysical imaging techniques with focus on applications in hydrogeology, glaciology and environmental studies; rock properties; imaging methods covered include: shallow seismic exploration, magnetic exploration, radiometric techniques, electrical resistivity tomography (ERT); electromagnetic (EM) methods; ground penetrating radar (GPR), application to environmental monitoring, climate change, environmental legislation. Prerequisites: one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146; one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Note: Not available to students in Honors or Specialization Geophysics. Note: Offered alternate years only. Consult Department for course schedule.
GEOPH 224 Geophysical Exploration Techniques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Geophysical exploration with focus on techniques relevant to hydrocarbon and mineral exploration; gravity and magnetic exploration techniques; basics of seismic wave propagation in Earth; seismic data processing; the geological interpretation of seismic reflection and refraction data. Prerequisites: one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146; one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Note: Not available to students in Honors or Specialization Geophysics. Note: offered alternate years only. Consult Department for course schedule.
GEOPH 325 Gravity, Magnetic, and Electrical Geophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Theory of gravity, shape of the earth, nature of the geomagnetic field, magnetic, and electrical exploration methods; factors controlling density, resistivity, and magnetic properties of rocks; applications in environmental geophysics, continental dynamics and mineral exploration; instrumentation. Analysis of gravity, magnetic and resistivity data. Prerequisite: PHYS 281 or 230, MATH 215 or 209 or 317.
GEOPH 326 Seismic Imaging =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Use of reflection and refraction seismology to image the Earth’s interior, with application to gas/oil and mineral exploration and environmental assessment; study of current technologies utilized to acquire, image and interpret 2D and 3D data sets. Real data sets and computer assignments will be used to produce seismic images of the subsurface. Prerequisite: PHYS 281 or 230, MATH 215 or 209 or 317.
GEOPH 332 Physical Properties of Geomaterials =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the fundamental physical properties of geophysically important materials; physics involved in the measurement of physical properties in the Earth especially in the context of geophysical well logging and laboratory measurement; integration of measurements with geological and geophysical field observations. Prerequisites: PHYS 271 or 208, 281 or 230, MATH 215 or 209 or 317.
GEOPH 421 Seismology and the Physical Structure of the Earth =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seismology; solutions to the elastic wave equation in layered media; three-component seismic field and ray theory: body and surface waves; normal modes and free oscillations; source mechanism; structure of the Earth; seismometers; inversion of seismic data. Pre or corequisite: Math 334. Prerequisites: PHYS 281.
GEOPH 424 Electromagnetic Methods in Geophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Theory and application of Maxwell’s equations to geophysics; resistivity of rocks, electromagnetic exploration; magnetotellurics, frequency and time domain EM methods, forward and inverse techniques to image crustal and mantle structures. Analysis of EM data collected at field school. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 337. Prerequisites: PHYS 281 or 230, 381, GEOPH 325.
GEOPH 426 Signal Processing in Geophysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of time series analyses and image processing techniques to large geophysical data sets; sampling of data and problems of aliasing; one and two dimensional Fourier transforms; the Z transformation; spectral analysis, filtering, and deconvolution; application of 1D and 2D filtering to seismic and gravity/magnetic data analysis. Prerequisites: MATH 311, GEOPH 326, PHYS 234 or equivalent.
GEOPH 431 Geophysical Inverse Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Quantitative methods to determine the physical properties of the Earth from indirect geophysical observations; formal treatment of geophysical inverse theory; topics include linear and nonlinear inverse problems, regularization techniques, model norms and misfit, tomography, and case histories of interpretation and analysis. Prerequisites: PHYS 234, 381, MATH 311, 337, GEOPH 325, 326 or permission of instructor.
GEOPH 436 Geophysics Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 10 days). Students conduct a wide variety of geophysical measurements in a field situation. The field school is run immediately prior to the fall term. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: GEOPH 325 and 326, or consent of instructor. Intended for students in a Specialization or Honours Geophysics program. Students in other programs should contact the Department of Physics for permission. Note: this course is graded on a credit/no credit basis.
GEOPH 438 Seismic Data Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). A variety of seismic and ground penetrating radar data sets are obtained by the student during field school; these data are corrected, enhanced, and imaged in a computer workstation laboratory, leading to a final geologic interpretation. Results obtained by the student will be presented in the format of a series of professional technical reports. Prerequisites: MATH 209, 214, or equivalent, GEOPH 326, PHYS 234 or equivalent. Pre- or corequisite: GEOPH 426 and 436 (field school).
GEOPH 440 Global Geodynamics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Topics to be discussed include plate tectonics, continental breakup and assembly; faulting and earthquakes; mantle and lithosphere rheology; global gravity and Earth’s rotation; heat transfer and convection in the Earth and planets; hotspots and mantle plumes, plate accretion and subduction; dynamics of the core, planetary magnetism and the geodynamo. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 337. Prerequisites: PHYS 281.
Graduate Courses
GEOPH 521 Global Geodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Topics to be discussed include plate tectonics, continental breakup and assembly; faulting and earthquakes; mantle and lithosphere rheology; global gravity and Earth’s rotation; heat transfer and convection in the Earth and planets; hotspots and mantle plumes, plate accretion and subduction; dynamics of the core, planetary magnetism and the geodynamo. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
GEOPH 524 Electromagnetic Methods in Geophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Theory and application of Maxwell’s equations to geophysics; resistivity of rocks, electromagnetic exploration; magnetotellurics, frequency and time domain EM methods, forward and inverse techniques to image crustal and mantle structures. Analysis of EM data collected at field school. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Note: This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been given for GEOPH 424.
GEOPH 526 Signal Processing in Geophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of time series analyses and image processing techniques to large geophysical data sets; sampling of data and problems of aliasing; one and two dimensional Fourier transforms; the Z transformation; spectral analysis, filtering, and deconvolution; application of computers in assignments. Note: This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been given for GEOPH 426.
GEOPH 531 Geophysical Inverse Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Quantitative methods to determine the physical properties of the Earth from indirect geophysical observations; formal treatment of geophysical inverse theory; topics include linear and nonlinear inverse problems, regularization techniques, model norms and misfit, tomography, and case histories of interpretation and analysis. Note: This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been given for GEOPH 431.
GEOPH 538 Seismic Data Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). A variety of seismic and ground penetrating radar data sets are obtained during field school; these data are corrected, enhanced, and imaged in a computer workstation laboratory, leading to a final geologic interpretation. Results obtained by the student will be presented in the format of a series of professional technical reports. Note: This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been given for GEOPH 438.
GEOPH 624 Theoretical Seismology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
German
GERM
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a German language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Scandinavian (SCAND)
Undergraduate Courses
GERM 111 Beginners’ German I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Intended for students with no previous knowledge of the language and designed to develop basic skills: listening, reading, speaking, writing, and intercultural competence. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or with German 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
GERM 112 Beginners’ German II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: GERM 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or with German 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
GERM 211 Intermediate German I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Intended to expand comprehension and production skills in written and oral German with a focus on intercultural communicative competence. Prerequisite: German 30 (or equivalent) or GERM 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency.
GERM 212 Intermediate German II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: GERM 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency.
GERM 225 Germany on Screen =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An examination of cinematic movements in Germany from the birth of film to the new millennium within their historical, social, or political context. Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other than English requirement of the Faculty of Arts.
GERM 274 The Culture and Civilization of Austria: An Introduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The cultural legacy of Austria from the Habsburgs to the present. Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other than English requirement of the Faculty of Arts.
GERM 303 Advanced German I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). A high-intermediate to advanced-level course intended to improve overall proficiency in spoken and written German. Prerequisite: GERM 212 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency.
GERM 304 Advanced German II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency.
GERM 306 German/English Phonetics and Phonology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Phonetic and phonemic analysis of English and German. Contrastive study includes application to teaching and learning. Co- requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 316 Introduction to German Applied Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Broad introduction to the main fields of German applied linguistics; multilingualism, second language acquisition, sociolinguistics, and discourse analysis. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 317 Teaching German as a Foreign Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues relevant to teaching German as a foreign language to adult learners. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 320 From Masterpieces to Bestsellers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interrogating the popular in texts and reception. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 340 Introduction to the Study of Modern German Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A survey of German-language literature in context since the Enlightenment. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 342 Introduction to Translation: German and English =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practice in translating texts in a variety of genres. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies. Not open to students with credit in GERM 441.
GERM 343 Postwar Cultures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Developments in society, politics, and popular as well as high culture from 1945 to the present in German-speaking countries. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 345 The Holocaust in Literature, Image, and Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Representations of the Holocaust as a topic in international documentaries, literature, images, and films. Theories of collective memory and the fictionalization of the ‘unthinkable.’ Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other than English requirement of the Faculty of Arts.
GERM 353 Myths, Tales, and Legends Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Storytelling throughout the German-speaking world from the medieval period, focusing on the development and proliferation of oral and written myths, tales, and legends. Co-requisite: GERM 303 or consent of Department.
GERM 399 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other than English requirement of the Faculty of Arts.
GERM 404 German for Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced German, both spoken and written skills, for the German business world. Prerequisite: GERM 304 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency.
GERM 409 German Dialects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A close look at some widely differing German dialects. Basic principles of German dialectology. Prerequisite: One of GERM 306, 316, or consent of Department.
GERM 416 Second Language Acquisition: German Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The course deals with the principles and processes in structured and unstructured language learning and with the different hypotheses and theories concerning language learning, in particular German. Prerequisite: One of GERM 306, 316, 317, or consent of Department.
GERM 417 German Sociolinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course introduces students to the study of the relationship between language and society. Topics discussed include variation in German, multilingualism in German-speaking countries, attitudes toward the German language, and language contact situations in which one of the languages is German. Prerequisite: One of GERM 306, 316, or consent of Department.
GERM 443 Advanced Translation: German into English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories, methods, and strategies of translation in a variety of genres. Prerequisite: GERM 342 or consent of Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
GERM 444 Exercises in Translation: English into German Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories, methods, and strategies of translation in a variety of genres. Prerequisite: GERM 342 or consent of Department. This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
GERM 450 Authorship in Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Approaches one author’s works (literary, filmic, or artistic), methods, and features in cultural or historical context. Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 451 Genre, Text, Technique Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examination of the techniques of a genre (including novel, play, novella, poetry, crime, melodrama, documentary, film, etc.). Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 452 History, Culture, and Periods of Representation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of a literary, filmic, or historical era on the basis of its cultural products. Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 453 Cultural and Literary Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Explores theoretical texts either of a specific topic or by a specific scholar. Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 454 Gender and Sexuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Studies texts and issues related to gender and sexuality. Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 455 Media and Image Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Studies texts and products of visual culture and communication. Prerequisite: GERM 340 or 343 and MLCS 210 or consent of the department.
GERM 495 Honors Thesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 499 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
GERM 599 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 643 Exercises in Translation: German into English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 644 Exercises in Translation: English into German Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 650 Authorship in Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 651 Genre, Text, Technique Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 652 History, Culture, and Periods of Representation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 653 Cultural and Literary Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 654 Gender and Sexuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 655 Media and Image Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 698 Topics in Germanic Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
GERM 699 Topics in German Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Greek
GREEK
Department of History and Classics Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) Prerequisite for all 400-level Greek courses: GREEK 302 or consent of Department.
(2) For additional related courses see Classics (CLASS) and Latin (LATIN) listings.
Undergraduate Courses
GREEK 101 Beginners’ Greek I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Elements of Classical Greek grammar and the reading of simple texts. Not open to students with credit in matriculation-level Greek.
GREEK 102 Beginners’ Greek II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A continuation of GREEK 101. Prerequisite: GREEK 101 or consent of Department.
GREEK 301 Intermediate Greek I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Review of grammar, reading of Greek texts; translation of simple sentences from English into Greek. Prerequisite: GREEK 102 or consent of Department.
GREEK 302 Intermediate Greek II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selections from Greek poetry and prose. Prerequisite: GREEK 301 or consent of Department.
GREEK 470 Topics in Greek Historiography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 475 Topics in Greek Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 477 Topics in Greek Prose Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 481 Topics in Greek Epic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 482 Topics in Greek Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 499 Individual Study in Greek Authors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 500 Fourth-Year Honors Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
GREEK 501 Topics in Greek Epic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 505 Topics in Greek Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 507 Topics in Greek Historiography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 509 Topics in Greek Prose Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 575 Topics in Greek Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 599 Supervised Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
GREEK 699 Conference Course Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Health Education
HE ED
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Note: See also INT D 410 for a course which is offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as an option or as a course in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
HE ED 110 Introduction to Personal Health and Well-Being Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). An individual-based analysis of physical fitness and personal health and wellness. Emphasis is on planning and managing one’s own lifestyle for health and well-being within the context of the current health care system. The blended format of the course will allow application of health information to personal context. Students will attend one lecture, complete online activities, and attend one seminar each week. Open to all students.
HE ED 220 Introduction to the Biological Aspects of Fitness to Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A biological analysis of the contributions of physical activity and exercise to fitness and long term health. Emphasis is on the introduction of training principles, health related components of physical fitness, exercise and physical activity guidelines, and the application of these concepts for determination of physical fitness, individual long term health outcomes, and preventable disease.
HE ED 221 Population Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course focuses on the role of physical activity and other health behaviours in the primary prevention of chronic diseases across the lifespan. An epidemiological approach will be used to examine determinants, health behaviours, health outcomes, and interventions at a population-level in Canada and around the world. Prerequisites: HE ED 110 or 220, PEDS 101 and 103.
HE ED 320 Social Dimensions of Health and Health Promotion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of contemporary, social, political and economic factors as they affect health and well-being, with a particular focus on understanding the social determinants of health.
HE ED 321 Psychological Dimensions of Health Promotion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An individual-based analysis of health-related behavior and behavior change. Emphasis will be placed upon social psychological approaches to understanding and changing such health-related behaviors as physical activity involvement, dietary practices, smoking, alcohol and drug abuse within a social context.
HE ED 421 Psychological and Behavioural Aspects of Chronic Disease Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth examination of the role of physical activity and other health behaviours in the secondary and tertiary prevention of chronic diseases. Relevant behaviour change theories and corresponding research will be used to examine health behaviour change interventions and other programs and initiatives used in the management of chronic disease. Prerequisites: HE ED 221 and 321.
HE ED 499 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course designed to meet the needs of individual students. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
#
Hebrew
HEBR
Department of History and Classics Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
HEBR 201 Biblical Hebrew Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-2). The goal is to provide students with enough knowledge of Biblical Hebrew that they may read most texts of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, with the help of a dictionary. The course is designed for students with no previous knowledge of Biblical Hebrew. Not to be taken by students with credit in RELIG 201.
#
Hindi
HINDI
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
HINDI 111 Beginners’ Hindi I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to Hindi language and culture. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency or any previous instruction in Hindi.
HINDI 112 Beginners’ Hindi II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Continuation of HINDI 111. Prerequisite: HINDI 111 or consent of the Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency. Students who have not taken HINDI 111 but have some background in Hindi will be tested the first days of class for eligibility.
#
History
HIST
Department of History and Classics Faculty of Arts
The courses listed below represent an extensive reorganization and modification of the Department’s offerings. Because of changes in course numbers and/ or content, students should compare their new course selections with courses previously taken, so as to avoid duplication or overlap. For Ancient History, see Classics listing.
Notes
(1) See also INT D 125, 325, 425, 475 and STS 200, for courses which are offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
(2) 400-level courses are normally conducted as seminars; all are variable content courses and the precise topics covered in any given course may vary from year to year. Some account, therefore, may be taken of the particular interests of students within the framework of the course. Normally, students who enroll in 400-level courses are expected to have at least *12 in History, including *6 at the 200 or 300 level (HIST 190 may be substituted for *3), with an average of at least 2.3. If they do not, they must obtain written permission from the instructor prior to their registration.
(3) HIST 110, 111 and 112 are designed to provide a foundation for senior and advanced history courses, and also background for studies in related humanities and social sciences.
Undergraduate Courses
HIST 110 The Pre-Modern World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). World history from the end of the 6th century to the 15th century.
HIST 111 The Early Modern World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). World history from the 15th century through the 18th century.
HIST 112 The Modern World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The world since the beginning of the 19th century. Not open to students with credit in HIST 120.
HIST 114 The History of the World in the Last 10 Years Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Global historical developments over the last 10 years with emphasis on the interaction of states and peoples.
HIST 115 Technology and History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of technology in historical developments around the world.
HIST 116 The Emergence of the Atlantic World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history and legacies of the transatlantic slave trade that linked Europe, Africa, and the Americas, emphasizing economic, political, social and cultural ramifications.
HIST 121 Topics in Global History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 123 Plague: Disease and Epidemics in History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The causes, impacts, and experiences of disease in human history.
HIST 127 Drugs in Modern Global History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The social, cultural, and political histories of criminalized drugs like opium, marijuana, amphetamines, and cocaine.
HIST 128 War, Revolution, and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The causes, course, and consequences of major conflicts around the globe, including their wider social effects.
HIST 130 Democracy, War and Consumer Capitalism: The Making of Modern Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). European history from the Enlightenment to the present.
HIST 191 Video Games, History, and Storytelling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The use of world history in video games.
HIST 206 Women and Gender in Modern Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of women and gender in Europe from the eighteenth century to the present.
HIST 207 Pre-Modern Europe I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of Europe from the fourth to the thirteenth century.
HIST 210 Europe in the 19th and 20th Centuries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 212 Pre-Modern Europe II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of western and central European history from approximately 1200 to 1800.
HIST 228 The Early History of the British Peoples Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the development of and relations among the societies and cultures of the British Isles from early times to 1688.
HIST 229 Britain and Its Peoples in the Modern Era Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the major themes and issues in the formation of modern Britain from 1688 to the present.
HIST 231 Scotland from Early Times to the Present Day Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of Scotland from the Reformation to the present.
HIST 232 Ireland from Early Times to the Present Day Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of Ireland from St Patrick to the present.
HIST 237 The Pacific World Since 1500 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploration, migration, trade, and geopolitics in the Pacific region, connecting Australia and the Pacific Islands with Asia and coastal North and South America.
HIST 241 Colonial Latin America Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Latin American history to 1810.
HIST 242 Modern Latin America Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Latin American history since 1810.
HIST 243 The Golden Age of Islam: History of the Muslim World to the 16th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical overview of the rise of Islam in seventh century Arabia and the political, economic and cultural impact of subsequent expansion into Asia, Africa and Europe.
HIST 246 Africa from Medieval to Modern Times Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). African history to the 19th century.
HIST 247 Africa in the 20th and 21st Centuries: From Colonial Rule to Modern Nations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). African history since the 19th century.
HIST 250 From Pocahontas to the Assassination of Lincoln: American History to 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of United States history from colonial times to the Civil War.
HIST 251 From the End of Slavery to the Present: American History Since 1865 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of United States history from the Civil War to the present.
HIST 260 Pre-Confederation Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 261 Post-Confederation Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 272 Religion in History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A study of a religious tradition(s), its teachings and rituals, along with its function in a specific historical setting, including its role in conditioning and reflecting a particular society and culture. Registration priority will be given to students in Honors, Majors or Minors in History.
HIST 280 East Asia to 1500 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of history of East Asia (China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam) to 1500.
HIST 281 East Asia from 1500 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of East Asia (China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam) from 1500 to the present.
HIST 285 China and the West Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of Chinese-Western cultural interactions from the time of Marco Polo to the present.
HIST 287 The Chinese in Canada and Canadians in China Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of the Chinese in Canada since the 1850s, and Canada’s cultural and social relations with China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, through historical and literary sources, media and film.
HIST 289 Introduction to Classical India Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The world of Classical India, from the emergence of the Mauryan Empire in the fourth century BCE to the close of the Gupta Empire in the fifth century CE.
HIST 290 Introduction to Historiography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Introduction to the basic concepts of historical inquiry and techniques of research and writing in History. Required for History majors. Prerequisite: A previous course in History and/or consent of the Department.
HIST 291 World War One Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The European conflict and its global dimensions, with an emphasis on political, social, and cultural histories.
HIST 293 History of Science, Technology and Medicine: Key Moments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Pivotal events in the history of science, technology, and medicine using a wide variety of historical sources, such as photographs, artifacts, films, letters, and diaries.
HIST 294 An Introduction to the History of Sciences, Technology, and Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Broad survey of topics in the history of science, technology, and medicine.
HIST 295 20th-Century Warfare Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth look at some of the conflicts of the 20th century, the course examines wars and revolutions including the two world wars, the Korean and Vietnam wars, African guerrilla wars, and the Gulf War. Analyze the causes and consequences of war and the evolution of weaponry. To be offered in alternate years.
HIST 296 World War Two Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The global conflict, with emphasis on political, social, scientific, and cultural aspects.
HIST 297 The History of Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lecture and discussion course about the development of Christian traditions in the world.
HIST 300 Topics in European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 301 Europe in the Age of Total War, 1890-1945 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). European experience with total war, economic crisis, cultural change and totalitarian regimes in the new era of mass politics and Great Power conflict.
HIST 302 Germany in the 20th Century and Beyond Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The economic, social, cultural, and political histories of the various Germanies in their European and global contexts, from 1900 to the present.
HIST 303 Saints and Medieval Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Beginning with the early Christian background, this course treats the various forms of sanctity (martyrs, monks and clerics) that appeared in medieval Europe, along with the social functions that the cult of the saints fulfilled in the world of Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
HIST 305 France: Old Regime and Revolution (1600-1815) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 306 France in the 20th Century and Beyond Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The evolution of French politics, society and culture in European and global contexts, from 1900 to the present.
HIST 309 The History of Paris Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of Paris from late antiquity to the present day, drawing on film, music, art, philosophy, geography, architecture, and literature.
HIST 310 A History of the Habsburg Monarchy, 1526-1918 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The multinational empire of the Habsburgs from the unification of Austria, Bohemia and Hungary to the destruction of the empire in World War I.
HIST 312 Foundations of East European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The ethnic, religious, social, and political factors which shaped the development of the peoples of Eastern Europe from the Middle Ages through the Age of Enlightenment. Intended as background to the later histories of the Balkans, ‘Central Europe’, and Ukraine.
HIST 313 Medieval and Early Imperial Russia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Russia from Kievan Rus’ through Catherine the Great’s reign, 900s to 1800. Note: Not open to students with credit in HIST 318.
HIST 320 Russia from Reform to Revolution, 1800-1917 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reaction, reform, and revolution, from Paul I to Nicholas II. Note: Not open to students with credit in HIST 318.
HIST 322 Russia in the 20th Century =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An historical survey of domestic and foreign policy, from Nicholas II to Yeltsin.
HIST 323 The Middle East in the Making: 1300-1920 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The rise and demise of the Ottoman Empire. An overview of the religious, cultural and political making of current-day North Africa, Near and Middle East, and Eastern Mediterranean. HIST 111 and 112 are recommended but not required.
HIST 326 Topics in History at the Movies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Provides students with the historical tools to analyze history as it is presented in movies. Topics will vary according to the instructor(s).
HIST 339 The Modern British Empire and the Commonwealth Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 342 Political and Social Revolution in Latin America Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Twentieth-century Chile, Guatemala, and Mexico. No prerequisite but HIST 242 is recommended.
HIST 345 Topics in Latin American History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 348 History of the Contemporary Middle East Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Social, cultural, and political history of the Middle East since the nineteenth century. Course covers dissolution of empires, imperialism, decolonization, and the creation of nation-states.
HIST 349 Topics in Middle East History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 351 History of Women in the United States Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A multicultural and multiracial history of women from the colonial period to the present.
HIST 352 African American History from Slavery to Black Power Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The African American experience in the United States from the colonial era to the present.
HIST 353 History of American Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The social history of American health care and health practitioners. How sickness, health, and healing have changed over the course of American history.
HIST 359 Canadian Environmental History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Brings the natural environment onto a shared stage with social, economic, political and cultural history in Canada from the last ice age to the present.
HIST 360 Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 362 History of Alberta Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic, social, and political realities that underlie the many images of Alberta.
HIST 365 The Canadian West to 1885 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Native diplomacy and warfare, the development of fur trade societies, and European colonization to the suppression of the North- West Rebellion.
HIST 366 The Canadian West Since 1885 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic, social, and political aspects of regional alienation, identity, and protest.
HIST 368 History of the Native Peoples of Canada to 1867 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Native cultures and societies, Native-newcomer relations, colonial Indian policy, and Native resistance to colonialism.
HIST 369 History of the Native Peoples of Canada Since 1867 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Federal Indian policy, treaties, reserve life, Native political resurgence, and legal and constitutional developments.
HIST 371 History of Women in Canadian Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The biological, social, economic, and political forces shaping women’s lives from the colonization of New France to the present.
HIST 373 Peasants, Slaves and Workers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of work regimes and regulation from feudalism to the present.
HIST 376 Canada 1900 to 1945 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Booms and depressions, world wars, social strife, and political experiments mark one of the most turbulent and critical eras in the nation’s history.
HIST 377 Canada Since 1945 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic, political, social and cultural developments in the postwar era.
HIST 378 Topics in the History of the United States Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 379 Religion in Modern Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Religious revival and secularization in Europe from the French Revolution to the present. Topics include: relations between church and state; intellectual challenges and responses; and religion transformed by modernity.
HIST 380 History of Slavery in the United States Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Slavery in colonial America and the United States.
HIST 382 Search for a Destiny: Japan’s Modern Era, 1868-Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Social, political, economic and technological development; motivations, policies, obstacles and achievements are emphasized.
HIST 383 The Civilization and Culture of Early China Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the formative periods of Chinese civilization from prehistory to circa 600.
HIST 384 History of Chinese Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical development of the major philosophical traditions in pre-modern China.
HIST 385 Modern China Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of China from the late nineteenth century to the present. Prerequisites: *3 from EASIA 101, HIST 280, 281, 285 or 290, or consent of Department.
HIST 387 History of Indian Yoga and Meditation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history and philosophy of early Yoga, exploring its focus on meditation, its literature, its connections with Buddhism, and its historical evolution. HIST 110, 289, or CLASS 110 are recommended but not required.
HIST 390 Imperial China from circa 600 to 1911 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The institutional and social history of imperial China from the Tang to the Manchu Ch’ing dynasties.
HIST 391 History of Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of technology from the beginning of the Industrial era to the modern day. HIST 115, HIST 294 or STS 200 are highly recommended but not required.
HIST 392 Ancient India- Diversity in History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Taking the case of ancient India, this course highlights how diversity can be explained in a multicultural society and how it defines the character of civilization on the sub-continent.
HIST 394 History of Astronomy and Cosmology from Stonehenge to the Space Age Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the major themes in the history of astronomy and cosmology from the ancient world to the present day.
HIST 395 The Early British Empire Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HIST 397 History of Science I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the intellectual, institutional, and ideological development of science, from Aristotle to the ‘Scientific Revolution’.
HIST 398 History of Science II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the intellectual, institutional, and ideological development of science, from Newtonianism to the present day.
HIST 401 Topics in the History of the Habsburg Monarchy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 403 Topics in Medieval European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 405 Fashion and Material Culture c. 1600-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The evolution and practice of fashion as a social, economic, political and cultural phenomenon from a cross-cultural perspective. Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 409 The Cultural and Intellectual History of the Enlightenment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in European HIST or consent of Department.
HIST 414 Topics in the History of Modern Germany Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 416 Topics in Eastern European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 419 Topics in Soviet History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 420 Topics in the History of Early Modern Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Thematic studies in European cultural, religious, and social history emphasizing popular culture and religion. Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 421 Topics in the History of Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 427 Topics in Indian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 428 Topics in the History of Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 429 Topics in British History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 435 Gender and the Colonial Encounter Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 436 Postcolonialism and History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 442 Topics in Latin American History Since 1850 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 444 Topics in Transnational History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 449 Advanced Topics in Middle East History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 450 Topics in American History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 453 Topics in 20th-Century America Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 460 Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 464 Topics in the History of the Canadian West Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 465 History of Edmonton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Themes in the history of Edmonton from the 19th century fur trade to the present day. Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 467 Topics in Alberta History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 468 Topics in the History of Ethnic Settlement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 470 Topics in Canadian Social History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 478 Topics in the History of the Canadian North Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 481 Topics in Chinese History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in Asian HIST or consent of Department.
HIST 486 Topics in the History of Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 490 Topics in British Empire and Commonwealth History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 493 War and Society in the Modern World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 494 Topics in Comparative History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 495 History, Discourse, and Practice of Sustainability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The historical development of sustainability discourses. Contains an optional Community Service Learning component.
HIST 496 Topics in the History of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 497 History of Women and Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar examines the multi-cultural history of women as health practitioners, patients, and health activists in North America. Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 498 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: *3 in HIST at the 300-level or consent of Department.
HIST 500 Methodology and Historiography for Honors Students Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 501 Special Subject, Fourth Year Honors History Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors essay, required in the fourth year of the Honors program.
Graduate Courses
Note: Previous study in the area is prerequisite for each course.
HIST 602 Research Methods and Resources in History Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0).
HIST 603 History of Historical Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 604 The Application of the Social Sciences to History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 605 Topics in the Nature of Historical Controversy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 609 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This is a credit/fail course. Not open to students in the non-thesis program.
HIST 614 Topics in the History of Later Medieval and Early Modern Europe Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A reading knowledge of at least one of the following languages is required: Latin, German, French, Dutch or Italian.
HIST 617 Fashion and Material Culture: Politics, Economies, Societies, c. 1600-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 627 Topics in Indian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 628 Topics in the History of Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 630 Problems in Imperial Russian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 631 Problems in 20th-Century Russian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 633 Problems in Modern East European History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 635 Gender and the Colonial Encounter Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 636 Postcolonialism and History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 646 The British Empire and Commonwealth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 649 Topics in Middle East History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 653 Topics in U.S. History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 655 Slavery and Anti-Slavery in the United States Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 660 Topics in Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 664 Topics in Western Canadian History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 665 History of Edmonton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Themes in the history of Edmonton from the 19th century fur trade to the present day.
HIST 676 Topics in Canadian Social History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 685 Tradition and Modernity in China Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 692 Topics in Latin American History Since 1850 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 693 Topics in Military History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 696 Topics in the History of the Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 698 Topics in the History of Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 699 Research Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HIST 800 Conference Course Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Not open to graduate students in the Department of History.
HIST 850 Advanced Topics in Historical Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Not open to graduate or honors students in the Department of History.
HIST 900 Directed Research Project Œ3-9 (variable) (either term, unassigned).
#
History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture
HADVC
Department of Art and Design Faculty of Arts
Note: Because presence at lectures and seminars, participation in classroom discussion, and the completion of assignments are important components of most courses, students serve their best interest by regular attendance.
This particularly applies to seminars in the History of Art and Design, and Visual Culture where attendance is a factor in grading.
Undergraduate Courses
HADVC 100 Introduction to the History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the history of art, design and visual culture.
HADVC 101 Introduction to the History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HADVC 102 Introduction to the History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
HADVC 202 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in the Renaissance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in the 15th and 16th centuries, with a focus on the Italian Renaissance, covering global exchange, anatomical illustration, and the invention of the artist. Not open to students with credit in ART H 252.
HADVC 203 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in the 17th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in the 17th century. Highlights the visual culture of Italy, Spain, France, the Netherlands and Flanders, covering representations of the body, politics, and identity in the work of artists such as Caravaggio, Rembrandt, Velázquez, and Rubens. Not open to students with credit in ART H 253.
HADVC 205 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture, 1700-1848 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in Europe during the 18th and early 19th centuries, focusing on the Enlightenment and response. Includes discussion of work from the Rococo, Neoclassical, and Romantic periods.
HADVC 206 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in the Early 20th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture from the beginnings of expressionism in the early twentieth century to the onset of the Second World War. Focuses on modernist and avant-garde modes of art and design in their historical context.
HADVC 208 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in the United States Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in the United States from the Colonial period to World War II. Includes work created by and depicting women, Indigenous peoples, and ethnic minorities and addresses such issues as politics, religion, nature, and industry.
HADVC 209 History of Modern Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of design from the 18th-century Industrial Revolution to the present. This course includes examples of communication, industrial, fashion and architectural design and urban planning, considering historical socio-political and environmental contexts.
HADVC 210 History of Photography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of photography, starting with its invention in the 19th century.
HADVC 211 Special Topics in the History of Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HADVC 213 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in Latin America Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical study of art, design and visual culture in Latin America, including Mesoamerican, pre-Hispanic Andean, Colonial, and Post-Independence cultures.
HADVC 214 Perspectives on the Arts of China Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to art history as a field of cultural production, studying the arts, design, and visual cultures in China from the neo- lithic era through today.
HADVC 215 China Art Now Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Chinese cultural identity as expressed in local and global economies of art, design, and visual culture from the Maoist era to the present.
HADVC 216 China’s Design Revolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course raises the question: when will China stop manufacturing and start designing? Students will study the historical foundations, theory and practice of sustainable design in China since the end of the Maoist era.
HADVC 217 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in Japan Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical study of art, design, and visual culture in Japan. Includes painting, sculpture, architecture, gardens, decorative arts, prints, and anime and addresses such concerns as identity, nation, tradition, and modernity.
HADVC 226 Gender, Sexuality and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to key themes in feminist art, design and visual culture. Examines the production and circulation of visual markers of difference (such as race, gender, sexuality, ability, size, etc.) through the media, popular culture, and contemporary art.
HADVC 246 History of Art, Design and Visual Culture in the Mid-20th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in the context of the Cold War and consumer society. Focuses on the persistence of modernism in the postwar era and the diverse challenges to it from 1940 to 1975. Not open to students with credit in ART H 256 (*3) offered prior to 2012-13.
HADVC 255 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture, 1848-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines art, design and visual culture in Europe from the socially and politically turbulent period of 1848 to the end of the long 19th century. Includes discussion of Realism, Impressionism, Symbolism, and Art Nouveau.
HADVC 256 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in the Contemporary Era Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to key issues in art, design, and visual culture from 1970 to the present, including art and identity, performance and politics, social sculpture, institutional critique, new media, bio art, relational aesthetics, social practice, and the pedagogical turn.
HADVC 257 History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of art, design and visual culture in Canada, from the colonial period to the present. Includes work created by and depicting women and Indigenous peoples, addressing such issues as nature, religion, gender, and national identity.
HADVC 301 Geographies of Art, Design, and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of art, design and visual culture of a particular geographic location (e.g. nation, city, region, continent). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200- level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 302 Vision and Visuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theories and practices of vision and visuality as they apply to the nature of perception, the relationship between looking, and the body and the politics of seeing. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200-level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 306 Modernism and Modernity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Aspects of the modern as it applies to the artistic practices of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200-level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 309 Design Theory and History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and/or contemporary issues in design practice and theory. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200- level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 311 Issues in the History of Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students are expected to have successfully completed two 200-level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HADVC 315 Chinese Urban Art and Design Now Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The historical and contemporary Chinese city-as representation, model, catalyst, and socio-political construct. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200- level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 326 Feminist Art: In Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The impact of feminism on the visual arts and culture more broadly, since the 1970s. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200-level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 330 Art and Institutions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between objects and their modes of interpretation, circulation and display (e.g. museums, academies, exhibitions, etc.) Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200-level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 336 Introduction to Performance Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to performance art of the 20th and 21st centuries. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200- level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 346 Introduction to Critical Theory in the History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Foundation in some of the most influential theoretical traditions of the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including Marxism, psychoanalysis, semiotics, structuralism and poststructuralism, feminism, and postcolonial theory. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed two 200- level HADVC courses with a minimum grade of B-.
HADVC 400 Theory and Methods in Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 403 Topics in Early Modern Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed one 300-level HADVC course with a minimum grade of B.
HADVC 406 Topics in Art, Design and Visual Culture in the Early 20th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed one 300-level HADVC course with a minimum grade of B.
HADVC 411 Special Topics in the History of Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HADVC 412 Topics in Asian Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed one 300-level HADVC course with a minimum grade of B.
HADVC 418 Special Subject, Fourth-Year Honors Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors essay, required in the fourth year of the Honors Program.
HADVC 455 Topics in Art, Design and Visual Culture in the Second Half of the 19th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed one 300-level HADVC course with a minimum grade of B.
HADVC 456 Topics in Art, Design and Visual Culture from the Mid-20th Century to the Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Students are required to have successfully completed one 300-level HADVC course with a minimum grade of B.
Graduate Courses
HADVC 503 Advanced Studies in Early Modern Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 506 Advanced Studies in Art, Design and Visual Culture in the Early 20th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 511 Advanced Special Topics in Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HADVC 512 Advanced Studies in Asian Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
HADVC 555 Advanced Studies in Art, Design and Visual Culture in the Second Half of the 19th Century Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 556 Advanced Studies in Art, Design and Visual Culture from the Mid-20th Century to the Present Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 600 Advanced Theory and Methods in Art, Design and Visual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
HADVC 611 Special Topics in Art History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HADVC 677 Graduate Research Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is open to graduate students in History of Art, Design, and Visual Culture only.
#
Human Ecology
HECOL
Department of Human Ecology
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Undergraduate Courses
Note: Enrolment in some HECOL course is restricted to students registered in human ecology programs, or to students registered in specified programs that require HECOL courses to meet degree requirements. Course prerequisites are enforced.
HECOL 100 Introduction to Principles and Practice in Human Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory course that provides a foundation in the body of knowledge that constitutes the field of human ecology. The history, philosophy, theoretical approaches and scope of the field are explored and skills that foster effective professional practice are discussed.
HECOL 170 Introduction to Textiles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory exploration of the origin, creation and use of textiles in our world. Chemical and physical properties of fibres and fabrics are introduced and an understanding of how these properties influence various clothing and textile end uses is developed.
HECOL 201 Introduction to Material Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of a range of objects and environments (from clothing to buildings) within selected time periods, and the study of particular perspectives through which such items can be interpreted. Students explore and learn about the connections between personal, social, temporal, and cultural contexts and the objects and environments that contribute to these contexts.
HECOL 210 Intimate Relationships =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A consideration of the sociological, psychological, and personal factors affecting the development, maintenance and dissolution of intimate relationships today.
HECOL 211 Human Sexuality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An inquiry into the nature of sexual behavior, its personal and cultural sources, and the personal, familial and societal implications.
HECOL 212 Later Life Families =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to generational and other interpersonal relationships of families throughout the later stages of the life course. Offered in alternate years.
HECOL 241 Fashion Industries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the soft goods industry including an overview of the apparel sector, apparel production, channels of distribution, fashion oriented products, global competitive influences, and career opportunities.
HECOL 250 Design Studies and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Explores the production of artifacts as material culture from a human ecology perspective. Artifact production focuses on the design process including visualization, communication, inspiration/influence and interface. Students are introduced to the production of two-and three-dimensional design through historical and contemporary examples. Students also complete hands-on design projects in the studio. Note: Credit will only be given for one of HECOL 150, 250 or 350.
HECOL 254 Apparel Design and Construction Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). In this studio course students develop fundamental awareness and skills for the textiles and clothing field including machine operation, design and construction terminology, pattern manipulation and fit, and quality construction techniques. Students construct samples and garments with a focus on professional standards in problem solving and production. Prerequisites: One of HECOL 250, 170, or DES 135 or DES 138/139.
HECOL 268 Survey of Historic Dress in the Western World =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical development of dress in the Western World with contemporary applications in design, merchandising, arts performance, education and museums. Resources include the Clothing and Textiles Collection.
HECOL 270 Applications of Textile Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advancement of textile concepts introduced in HECOL 170 with an emphasis on textile finishing, colouration, care and maintenance. Techniques for fibre identification and yarn and fabric structural analysis are covered. Prerequisites: HECOL 100 and 170.
HECOL 300 Policy Development and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Processes of policy development, implementation and analysis; Canadian policy environments, institutional frameworks and instruments; application to professional practice and to current social and economic issues.
HECOL 301 Program Planning and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Theories and processes of program planning, implementation, and evaluation from a human ecological perspective. Prerequisite: successful completion of *60.
HECOL 310 Parent-Child Relationships Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of parent-child relationships, with a concentration from infancy through adolescence. An examination of theoretical and research perspectives of parent-child relationships and the practical application of those perspectives. Prerequisite: (PSYCO 104 and 105) or EDPY 200; PSYCO 104 and 105 are preferred. Offered in alternate years.
HECOL 313 Family Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to family dynamics from the perspective of family theory. Changes in family dynamics across the life course will be examined using theoretical concepts, research, and practical application of concepts. Prerequisite: successful completion of *60.
HECOL 315 Interviewing and Counseling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to interviewing and counseling strategies for working with individuals using a strengths-based, human ecological approach. Prerequisite: successful completion of *30 including HECOL 100.
HECOL 321 Introduction to Family Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the principles of money management for individuals, households, and families. Students learn basic financial literacy skills and tools required to make key financial decisions by identifying financial goals, assessing current resources, developing and implementing a financial plan and evaluating financial progress. It is also expected that students will be able to apply these tools in their professional work to enhance clients’ financial literacy and their ability to resolve financial management challenges. Prerequisite: ECON 101; it is recommended that students have completed both ECON 101 and 102.
HECOL 322 Family Economic Issues =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of current issues affecting the economic well-being of Canadian families and of government policies which address those issues. Issues explored include work and family; the economics of childbearing, education, delayed life transitions, and aging; intrafamily allocation of resources; and money and family relationships. Prerequisites: ECON 101; it is recommended that students have completed both ECON 101 and 102.
HECOL 333 Cross-Cultural Textiles Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). An introduction to the historical and technological development of cross-cultural textiles and survey of common textile-making techniques, designs, and embellishments. Ethnographic textiles are analyzed in the context of socio-cultural, political, economic, environmental, and aesthetical meanings. The course combines lectures, class discussions, videos, and examination of artifacts from the Clothing and Textiles Collection. Prerequisite: *30.
HECOL 354 Apparel Design and Product Development I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Principles of design and merchandising applied to apparel design and portfolio development. A creative problem-solving approach to production of a line of clothing. Prerequisite: HECOL 254. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 360 Dress and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The complex phenomenon of bodily adornment is explored in relationship to values, attitudes, activities, beliefs, and forms of knowledge. Clothing is considered in terms of how it is expressive of various aspects of culture. Students develop analytical skills to help them understand the role played by clothing in different times, places, and contexts. Prerequisite: HECOL 201.
HECOL 370 Quality Assurance for Textiles and Apparel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Exploration of quality assurance of textiles and apparel through materials testing. Performance of textiles relative to product standards and specifications. Prerequisite: HECOL 270.
HECOL 408 Intentional Professional Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation for human ecology practicum placement. Effective workplace relationships and issues involved in professional practice are explored within the context of being a practicum student. Reflective practice and career development are key concepts of the course. Taken in the term preceding HECOL 409. Application to Practicum Coordinator required four to eight months prior to start of the course. Prerequisite: Open to human ecology students only; must have completed *90, including HECOL 100, prior to application.
HECOL 409 Practicum in Human Ecology Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-0-16). Supervised field experience. Students are placed in professional settings appropriate to their academic background and career goals. Participation in a weekly online seminar is required. Open to Human Ecology students who have completed *105. Prerequisite: HECOL 408. Application required (see description of HECOL 408). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
HECOL 412 Family Challenges Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth exploration of several family challenges (e.g. addiction, homelessness, and childhood and adult abuse). An introduction to specific prevention and intervention approaches related to family challenges. Prerequisite: HECOL 313.
HECOL 413 Working With Families Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Assessment and counseling strategies for working with families using a strengths-based, family-centred approach. Prerequisite: HECOL 315 or EDPY 442.
HECOL 414 Seniors and Their Environments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the environments in which older people live. The course uses an ecological framework to study the symbolic, physical, interpersonal, community, and political environments of older adults in Canada and other world regions. Prerequisite: successful completion of *60. Offered in alternate years.
HECOL 440 Family Policy Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of current policy issues faced by Canadian families and the examination of policies and programs affecting family well-being and relationships. Prerequisite: HECOL 300.
HECOL 441 Textiles and Apparel in the Global Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Production and distribution of textiles and apparel in a global context; issues and policy related to international trade agreements; impact of national and international consumer, labor and environmental standards. Prerequisites: HECOL 241 and 300.
HECOL 443 Family Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Family law regulates intimate and domestic relationships. Examines from a user’s perspective, how statutory and common law affects family relationship issues such as marriageand divorce, child custody and child welfare, adoption, and new reproductive technologies. Prerequisite: HECOL 300. Offered in alternate years.
HECOL 454 Apparel Design and Product Development II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advanced problems in apparel design and product development. Draping and fabric manipulation techniques are explored. The focus is traditional specialty fabric techniques and experimental production methods. Prerequisite: HECOL 254. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 460 Nineteenth, Twentieth, and Twenty-First Century Dress in the Western World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Advanced study of Western dress from the 19th century to the present. Lectures and labs introduce students to artifactual research and the handling, storage, examination, documentation and exhibition of artifacts. Resources include fashion plates, photographic archives and artifacts from the University of Alberta’s Clothing and Textiles Collection. Prerequisite: HECOL 268. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 462 Material Culture in Home and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-3). Framed within the context of theories in human ecology, this course investigates material culture ranging from individual artifacts to community, including local and global environments. The roles and effects of material culture on individual, familial and community living are explored through literature, artifacts and life-stories. These issues are examined through a combination of seminars and group work culminating in an exhibit. Prerequisite: HECOL 201. Offered in alternate years.
HECOL 464 Fashion and Material Culture: Politics, Economies, Societies, c. 1600-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the evolution and practice of fashion as a social, economic, political and cultural phenomenon from a cross-cultural perspective. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 465 Material Culture, Methods and Identities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how to do research into the relationships between people and objects (from clothing to buildings). Students will learn about how to conduct primary research through a range of methods, approaches, and theories associated with material culture studies. Credit will only be given for one of HECOL 465 or 565. Prerequisite: *60.
HECOL 469 Material Culture in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how human ecological and material culture approaches contribute to the analysis of a range of contemporary issues in design practice. Prerequisite: *60
HECOL 470 Topics in Advanced Textile and Apparel Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced topics in functional textiles and clothing are examined, with an emphasis on current research and relevant theories and mechanisms. Prerequisite: HECOL 370.
HECOL 473 Clothing and Materials for Sport and Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). A human ecological exploration of the selection, use and performance of clothing and materials used for workplace safety protection and sporting/recreational activities. Prerequisite: HECOL 370. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 476 Textile Analysis and Care Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). The causes of deterioration and damage in modern and historic textiles are addressed. Macro and microscopic evidence are combined with theories of fibre degradation and textile soiling to identify the causes of material wear, discoloration and failure during normal use, care and storage. Theory related to the cleaning of textiles will include detergency, bleaching, dry- cleaning and specialized procedures for historical textiles. Prerequisites: HECOL 270. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 490 Independent Investigation in Human Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Independent project or study of a topic in human ecology planned by the student with an instructor. Open to human ecology students only. Prerequisite: successful completion of *75, application to Department, and consent of Instructor.
HECOL 492 Selected Topics in Family Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Normally offered in Spring or Summer. Can be taken for credit more than once if the topics are different. Prerequisite: successful completion of *60 or consent of Instructor.
HECOL 493 Selected Topics in Textiles and Clothing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Normally offered in Spring or Summer. Can be taken for credit more than once if the topics are different. Prerequisite: successful completion of *60 or consent of Instructor. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
Graduate Courses
HECOL 501 Independent Project in Human Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Independent study of a topic in human ecology planned by the student in consultation with the Instructor. Independent studies may be taken more than once for credit.
HECOL 522 Introduction to Structural Equation Modeling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Provides an introduction to the theory and practice of structural equation modeling with social science data. Practical application in Mplus is emphasized by computing and interpreting statistical models within this framework, including path analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and structural equation modeling. Prerequisites: Statistics coursework covering regression analysis. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 532 Family Health and Wellness; Theoretical and Measurement Issues for Research and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Critical examination of the conceptualization and measurement of family health and the interrelationships between the health of families and their members. Applications to research and practice in a variety of disciplines including family ecology, nursing, health promotion, occupational therapy, education, and psychology. Not to be taken if credit received in NURS 532.
HECOL 550 Selected Topics in Human Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Topics of current interest. May be taken for credit more than once. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
HECOL 562 Material Culture in the Home and Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-3). Framed within the context of theories in human ecology, this course investigates material culture ranging from individual artifacts to local and global community environments. The roles and effects of material culture on individual, family, and community living are explored through literature, artifacts and life stories. These issues are examined through a combination of seminars and group work culminating in a project. Prerequisite: consent of Supervisor and Department.
HECOL 565 Material Culture, Methods, and Identities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how to do qualitative research into the relationships between people and objects (from clothing to buildings). Students will learn how to conduct primary research through a range of qualitative methods, approaches, and theories associated with material culture studies. Credit will only be given for one of HECOL 465 or 565.
HECOL 569 Material Culture in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Explores how human ecological and material culture approaches contribute to the analysis of a range of contemporary issues in design practice.
HECOL 570 Advanced Topics and Theory in Textile and Apparel Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced topics in functional textiles and clothing are examined, with an emphasis on current research and relevant theories and mechanisms. Seminars are the same as for HECOL 470, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Not to be taken if credit received for HECOL 681.
HECOL 571 Issues and Trends in Textiles and Clothing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Content and philosophy of the study of textiles and clothing from a human ecological perspective. Not to be taken if credit received for HECOL 680.
HECOL 573 Clothing and Materials for Sport and Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). A human ecological exploration of the selection, use and performance of clothing and materials used for workplace safety protection and sporting/recreational activities. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 575 Fundamentals of Human Comfort in Protective Clothing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examination of heat and mass transfer between clothing and the human body in relation to comfort and protection.
HECOL 576 Textile Analysis and Care Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). The causes of deterioration and damage in modern and historic textiles are addressed. Macro and microscopic evidence are combined with theories of fibre degradation and textile soiling to identify the causes of material wear, discoloration and failure during normal use, care, and storage. Theory related to the cleaning of textiles will include detergency, bleaching, dry-cleaning and specialized procedures for historical textiles. Lectures and labs are the same as for HECOL 476, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor. Normally offered in alternate years.
HECOL 579 Research Methods in Textile and Apparel Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of qualitative and quantitative research methods relevant to clothing and textiles scholarship.
HECOL 601 Ways of Knowing in Human Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Enquiry into the nature, scope and object of human ecology knowledge; the distinct contributions of various modes of inquiry; and the relationship between ways of knowing and selected issues related to the acquisition of knowledge, such as ethics and research methods.
HECOL 604 Fundamentals of Aging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical analysis of the issues and environments that influence the lives of older Canadians. Focus is on theories and knowledge about age-related normative and non-normative changes and their interaction with the physical, social, community and policy environments of older adults.
HECOL 610 Review of Issues and Trends in Family Ecology and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Content and philosophy of the study of the family from a human ecological perspective.
HECOL 611 Theory in Family Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Consideration of family theory as it relates to research and practice. Pre or corequisite: HECOL 610 or consent of Instructor.
HECOL 612 Family Challenges Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth exploration of several family challenges (e.g., addiction and homelessness). An introduction to specific intervention approaches related to family challenges.
HECOL 613 Graduate Practicum in Human Ecology Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Selected practicum placements to integrate theory and practice in a variety of agencies. When used as the capping exercise for the course-based Master’s program, requirements include a written report and an oral presentation to the Department and/or where appropriate to relevant agency staff. Prerequisites: consent of Supervisor and Department.
HECOL 615 Families and Aging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current issues in mid- and later-life families including relationships between aging parents and adult children, grandparent relationships, family caregiving.
HECOL 617 Intimate Relationships Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In-depth examination of intimate relationships, including theoretical perspectives, research methods, relationship forms and processes, and how context affects relationships. Students will consider how sociological, psychological, and personal factors affect the development, maintenance and dissolution of intimate relationships today.
HECOL 619 Work-Family Integration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of the complex relationship between two important social institutions: work and family. Topics include demographic, social, and economic changes that have shaped the work-family relationship as a contemporary issue; its implications for individuals, families, work environments and society; and theoretical and practical perspectives on the challenges of and strategies for managing the relationship.
HECOL 640 Development and Analysis of Family Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of the elements of policies and policy issues that affect contemporary Canadian families. The elements of policies and policy issues studied include: their origins and underlying ideologies; their institutional frameworks and foundations; and their substance, nature, and impact on families. Prerequisite: HECOL 300 or equivalent.
HECOL 651 Advanced Independent Inquiry in Human Ecology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
HECOL 652 Advanced Independent Inquiry in Human Ecology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Prerequisite: consent of Instructor
HECOL 654 Research Project in Human Ecology Œ3-6 (variable) (either term, variable). An original research project, conducted with guidance from a faculty member, typically resulting in the preparation of a research report and a submission to a professional academic conference for a poster or paper presentation OR the preparation of a manuscript that is submitted to a scholarly journal for publication. May be taken more than once for credit.
HECOL 661 Perspectives on Material Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical analysis of specific issues, theories, and perspectives that influence material culture studies, as a field of research and practice.
HECOL 662 Themes in Material Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A range of perspectives and approaches to theory and research as they are used in the field of material culture studies.
HECOL 664 Fashion and Material Culture: Politics, Economies, Societies, c. 1600-1900 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines the evolution and practice of fashion as a social, economic, political and cultural phenomenon from a cross-cultural perspective. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor.
HECOL 668 Material Culture and Curatorship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines the different ways in which artifacts are interpreted and used in both physical and virtual exhibitions. Discussion of different types of artifacts and institutions, registration processes, collection storage, handling and mounting, documentation and exhibition design.
HECOL 673 Textile and Apparel Science Œ1-9 (variable) (either term, variable). Modules on laboratory and field research, fibre theory, soiling and detergency, colour theory and measurement, comfort and protection theory and measurement, as well as other topics related to a student’s specific research area. May be taken more than once for credit.
HECOL 682 Program Planning and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories, approaches, and processes fundamental to the development, implementation, and evaluation of programs that effect change and build capacity in families, communities and organizations.
HECOL 691 Professional Seminar 1 Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This professional development seminar is one in a series that provides an introduction to graduate study in the Department of Human Ecology, and to career development and professional issues in human ecology. Topics include: an introduction to the field of human ecology; what it means to be a graduate student; supervisory and professional relationships; research and teaching assistantships; applying for scholarships; professional networking; professional bodies/associations; conferences; academic and practice journals; and academic writing and referencing. Restricted to graduate students in the Department of Human Ecology. Typically taken in the first semester of the graduate program.
HECOL 692 Professional Seminar 2 Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This professional development seminar is one in a series that provides an introduction to graduate study in the Department of Human Ecology, and to career development and professional issues in human ecology. Topics include: critical reading of the research literature; ethical issues in conducting research; preparing a submission for the research ethics review board; preparing and reviewing conference submissions; preparing a poster; and preparing a research proposal. Restricted to graduate students in the Department of Human Ecology. Fulfills part of FGSR’s mandatory ethics training requirement. Typically taken in the second semester of the graduate program.
HECOL 693 Professional Seminar 3 Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This professional development seminar is one in a series that provides an introduction to graduate study in the Department of Human Ecology, and to career development and professional issues in human ecology. Topics include: funding agencies; preparing and reviewing grant proposals; preparing and reviewing manuscripts for publication; oral presentations; writing for different audiences; and preparing for comprehensive exams. Restricted to doctoral level students in the Department of Human Ecology. Typically taken in the third semester of the doctoral program.
HECOL 694 Professional Seminar 4 Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This professional development seminar is one in a series that provides an introduction to graduate study in the Department of Human Ecology, and to career development and professional issues in human ecology. Topics include: developing an academic career; obtaining teaching experience and developing a teaching dossier; developing a program of research; working in research teams; authorship; intellectual property issues related to research data; preparing for candidacy exams; surviving your dissertation; preparing a curriculum vita; and applying and interviewing for jobs or post-doctoral fellowships. Restricted to doctoral level students in the Department of Human Ecology. Typically taken in the fourth semester of the doctoral program.
HECOL 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 0-0-6). Comprises the capping exercise for the course-based Masters programs. Requirements include conducting an applied research project, and both a written project report and an oral presentation to the Department, and where appropriate, to relevant practising professionals.
#
Human Geography and Planning
HGP
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
HGP 100 Introduction to Human Geography and Planning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The spatial organization of human landscapes, and significance of the distribution of human activity. Not available to students with credit in EAS 192.
HGP 210 Introductory Planning History and Practice =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: HGP 100 or EAS 192. Not available to students with credit in EAS 296.
HGP 211 Introduction to Design Fundamentals for Planners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: HGP 100 or EAS 192 and consent of Department.
HGP 240 Cities and Urbanism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to urban geography and planning emphasizing interactions between the built environment and processes of social and economic change. Topics include urban form, housing and diversity in North American cities. Prerequisite: Any *3 course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 293.
HGP 250 Natural Resources and Environmental Management =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to sustainable development approaches to dealing with environmental issues including renewable and non- renewable natural resources. Prerequisite: Any *3 course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 294.
HGP 252 Human Dimensions of Environmental Hazards =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interactions between environmental hazards, individuals and communities; risk reduction strategies by members of the public and management agencies. Prerequisite: Any *3 course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 295.
HGP 310 Land Use Planning and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development and interpretation of plans, zoning, policy, and bylaws. Prerequisite: HGP 210 or EAS 296, and HGP 211.
HGP 315 Community Planning and Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Planning in the community context, including methods of public consultation and community-based development are examined. Prerequisite: HGP 210 or EAS 296.
HGP 316 Planning Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Includes an introduction to the legal basis for planning in Alberta and other provinces. Prerequisite: HGP 210 or EAS 296.
HGP 317 Planning Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and contemporary planning theory and its influence on the practice of planning. Prerequisite: HGP 210 or EAS 296.
HGP 341 Social and Cultural Geography =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Connections between space, society and culture at multiple scales. Formation and significance of cultural landscapes, and shaping of social life by spatial arrangements. Prerequisite: EAS 192 or HGP 100 and any one EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 393.
HGP 342 The Spatial Economy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of economic activities on both the local and the international scale. Prerequisite: EAS 192 or HGP 100, and any one EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 396.
HGP 343 Health, Space and Place =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Geographic research on health and disease, including environmental, social, individual and institutional factors. Prerequisites: EAS 192 or HGP 100, and any one EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 395.
HGP 355 Environmental Planning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Introduction to issues in policy making, planning and management related to human interaction with the physical environment. Prerequisite: EAS 192 or HGP 100 or any EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Not available to students with credit in EAS 391.
HGP 381 Topics In Human Geography and Planning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and application of contemporary issues in human geography and/or planning. Prerequisite: EAS 192 or HGP 100, and one EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Topics vary; may be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated.
HGP 382 Topics in Regional Geography =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected regions are studied in a regional or topical format. Topics vary; may be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated.
HGP 399 Research Methods in Human Geography and Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Collection and analysis of data for social research in planning and human geography. Research design and sampling procedures. Both qualitative and quantitative methods are explored. Fieldwork required. Prerequisites: Any three HGP courses or any three EAS X9X courses. Not available to students with credit in EAS 392.
HGP 401 HGP Work Experience Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Required of all students who have recently completed an HGP Work Experience Practicum. This course must be completed during the first academic year following their return to full-time studies in order to graduate in the HGP Work Experience Practicum. Grade is determined based on the employer evaluation of the student’s job performance and the performance on written assignments and oral presentations during the course. Prerequisite: WKEXP 801 and WKEXP 802.
HGP 410 Professional Planning Practice and Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The professional practice of planning is covered including the role of planners in society and professional ethics for planners. Prerequisite: HGP 310. Restricted to Planning Major and Planning Specialization students.
HGP 412 Finance for Planners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to municipal finances and the development process as it relates to the Planning profession. Prerequisite: ECON 101. Restricted to Planning Major and Planning Specialization students.
HGP 443 Environment and Health =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of relations between human health and environmental issues, particularly those related to the natural, built, and social environments. Prerequisite: EAS 395 or HGP 343 or consent of Instructor. Not available to students with credit in EAS 494.
HGP 450 Resource Management and Environmental Policy =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Roles of governmental and nongovernmental organizations, industry and private enterprise, and advocacy organizations in addressing issues of resource scarcity and environmental policy. Institutions, policies, and strategies for resource and environmental management at the provincial/state, national, and international levels. Prerequisites: EAS 294 or HGP 250. Not available to students with credit in EAS 491.
HGP 452 Human Dimensions of Environmental Change =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the human dimensions of climate change. Topics include climate change politics, public perceptions and impacts, vulnerability and resilience, mitigation and adaptation. Classes concurrent with HGP 552. Prerequisite: Any 300-level EAS or HGP course or Consent of Instructor. Not available to students with credit in EAS 493.
HGP 470 Geographical Information Systems and Advanced Cartography for Social Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). The application of spatial analytic tools to social science topics. Assignments impart technical aspects through hands-on experience with commercial and in-house spatial analysis software. Prerequisite: EAS 221. Not available to students with credit in EAS 492.
HGP 481 Advanced Topics in Human Geography =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EAS 192 or HGP 100, and any one EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course. Topics vary; may be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Students cannot repeat topics that have been taken previously in EAS 495.
HGP 485 Advanced Topics in Planning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploring planning theories in the context of contemporary events phenomena. Prerequisite: HGP 210 and consent of the department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
HGP 495 Planning Studio Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical study of community planning processes, development or redevelopment projects, or other relevant case studies. Field Work Required. Prerequisites: HGP 310 and consent of Department. Restricted to Planning Major and Planning Specialization students.
HGP 496 Undergraduate Thesis Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 3-0-0). Required for Honors students in their final year. Restricted to honors students in Human Geography. Prerequisite: Any 300 level HGP course and approval of the Department.
HGP 497 Directed Study in Human Geography or Planning I Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
HGP 498 Directed Study in Human Geography or Planning II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: EAS 497 or HGP 497 and Consent of Instructor.
HGP 499 Practical Study in Human Geography and Planning =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 10 - 15 days). Intensive field or practical study in Human Geography and Planning, typically as part of a team working off-campus. Details and areas of study may vary from year to year; consult the department about current offerings, fees and timing. Prerequisite: Any EAS 29X or HGP 2XX course and Consent of Instructor. Students cannot repeat topics that have been taken previously in EAS 499. This course may require the payment of additional fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
Graduate Courses
HGP 550 Advanced Resource Management and Environmental Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Roles of governmental and nongovernmental organizations, industry and private enterprise, and advocacy organizations in addressing issues of resource scarcity and environmental policy. Institutions, policies, and strategies for resource and environmental management at the provincial/state, national, and international levels. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Research project. Classes concurrent with HGP 450. Not available to students with credit in EAS 491, 591 or HGP 450.
HGP 552 Advanced Human Dimensions of Global Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the human dimensions of climate change. Topics include climate change politics, public perceptions and impacts, vulnerability and resilience, mitigation and adaptation. Research project. Classes concurrent with HGP 452. Not available to students with credit in EAS 493, 593 or HGP 452.
HGP 570 Advanced Geographical Information Systems for Social Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Provides spatial analytic tools to social geographers and provides a social science perspective to geoprocessing students. Examples arise from marketing, operations research, sociology, and urban and economic geography. Assignments impart technical aspects through hands-on experience with commercial and in-house spatial analysis software. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Research project. Classes concurrent with HGP 470. Not available to students with credit in EAS 492, 592 or HGP 470.
HGP 581 Advanced Issues in Human Geography Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics vary; may be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Classes concurrent with HGP 481.
HGP 599 Advanced Practical Study in Human Geography Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 10 - 15 days). Intensive field or practical study in Human Geography, typically as part of a team working off-campus. Details and areas of study may vary from year to year; consult the department about current offerings, fees and timing. Topics vary; may be taken more than once for credit provided no topic is repeated. Classes concurrent with HGP 499. This course may require the payment of additional fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
Human Resource Management
HRM
Department of Strategic Management and Organization Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all HRM courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Students who have completed IND R courses are not allowed to register in a HRM course with the same number.
#
Humanities Computing
HUCO
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Note: See the following sections for listings of Office of Interdisciplinary programs: Comparative Literature (C LIT); Interdisciplinary (INT D) Faculty of Arts Courses; Middle Eastern and African Studies (MEAS); Religious Studies (RELIG); Science, Technology and Society (STS), and Writing Studies (WRS).
Graduate Courses
HUCO 500 Survey of Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HUCO 510 Theoretical Issues in Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Relationship of computing methods to humanities research from several theoretical perspectives.
HUCO 520 Technical Concepts and Approaches in Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HUCO 530 Project Design and Management in Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Design, implementation, management and maintenance of Humanities Computing research projects.
HUCO 613 Cyberspace and Networked Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HUCO 616 Multimedia for the Humanities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Exploration of the nature and cultural significance of multimedia.
HUCO 617 Topics in Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
HUCO 618 Directed Reading in Humanities Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Immunology and Infection
IMIN
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
IMIN 200 Infection and Immunity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduces the principles and mechanisms of immunity in eukaryotes. Provides an overview of the major groups of infectious agents (virus, bacteria, parasites) and examines selected microorganisms within the context of the host response to pathogens and pathogen evasion strategies. Pre- or corequisites: BIOCH 200 and MICRB 265. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in BIOCH 450. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
IMIN 324 Basic Virology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the structure, replication, and taxonomy of bacteriophages, plant, insect, and animal viruses. Their role in disease and methods of control and detection is also discussed. Prerequisites: BIOL 207, IMIN 200 and BIOCH 200 or 205. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in INT D 224. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and of Medical Microbiology and Immunology.) [Biological Sciences]
IMIN 371 Introduction to Immunology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Survey course introducing the student to immunological concepts. Topics include the clonal selection theory, antibody structure and specificity, genetic basis of immune diversity, antibody-antigen reactions, cell interactions in immune responses, the molecular basis of non-self recognition, MHC molecules and transplantation, tolerance, effector mechanism of immunity, hypersensitivity and immunodeficiency. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 or 205, BIOL 207, and IMIN 200. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in INT D 371. (Offered jointly by the Department of Biological Sciences and the Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology.) [Biological Sciences]
IMIN 372 Research Techniques in Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 1-0-3). A lecture and laboratory course covering theory and practice behind selected immunological techniques. Techniques covered may include: lymphocyte isolation, flow cytometry, mixed lymphocyte reactions, immunocytochemistry, immunoprecipitation, ELISA, western blotting, expression cloning and monoclonal antibody technology. Labs will sometimes require students to return the next day to check on plates or cultures. Prerequisite: IMIN 371. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in INT D 372. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences]
IMIN 401 Comparative Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The phylogeny and evolution of immune systems. Examines the various strategies for disease resistance used by all organisms from plants to humans. The use and evolution of specific components of innate and adaptive immunity will be considered within the context of the biology of the organisms. This course involves both lectures and graded discussions. Prerequisites: IMIN 371. Credit cannot be obtained for both IMIN 401 and IMIN 501. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
IMIN 405 Innate Immunity Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course covers topics of innate immunity with emphasis on strategies for pathogen recognition, local and systemic activation of the innate immune response, and regulation of innate effector mechanisms. Innate defense strategies against pathogens as well as detection and elimination of tumors will also be covered. Lectures will be followed by active discussions of selected readings pertaining to current research in the subject area. Prerequisites: IMIN 371 or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both IMIN 405 and 505. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
IMIN 410 Bioinformatics for Molecular Biologists Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). This course will introduce the student to common and advanced methods in bioinformatics. In a mix of lectures and hands-on computer sessions, the student will solve realistic biological questions in the areas of sequence analysis, distant homology detection, phylogeny, correlating sequence to structure, protein structure analysis, and genomics. The student will obtain a thorough understanding of bioinformatics methods, but the focus is on application of methods in the context of molecular biology research rather than studying details of the algorithms or computer programming. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. BIOCH 320 or 330 highly recommended. Priority given to senior students in the IMIN program. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
IMIN 452 Advanced Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). A lecture course on the detailed mechanisms of the immune system, describing recent discoveries in cellular and molecular immunology. Topics include mechanisms of T-cell receptor selection, antigen processing, activation of B and T lymphocytes, cellular collaboration, negative and positive regulatory mechanisms in immunity, transplantation, cytokine actions and interactions, autoimmunity, interaction between immune systems and pathogens, and immunogenetics. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 and IMIN 371. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in MMI 552. (Offered jointly by the Department of Biological Sciences, the Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology and the Department of Oncology). [Biological Sciences]
Graduate Courses
IMIN 501 Advanced Comparative Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The phylogeny and evolution of immune systems. Examines the various strategies for disease resistance used by all organisms from plants to humans. The use and evolution of specific components of innate and adaptive immunity will be considered within the context of the biology of the organisms. Lectures and graded discussions are the same as for IMIN 401, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both IMIN 401 and IMIN 501. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
IMIN 505 Advanced Innate Immunity Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course covers topics of innate immunity with emphasis on strategies for pathogen recognition, local and systemic activation of the innate immune response, and regulation of innate effector mechanisms. Innate defense strategies against pathogens as well as detection and elimination of tumors will also be covered. Lectures will be followed by active discussions of selected readings pertaining to current research in the subject area. Lectures and graded discussions are the same as for IMIN 405 but with evaluation appropriate for graduate students. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both IMIN 405 and 505. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Medical Microbiology and Immunology). [Biological Sciences].
#
Integrated Petroleum Geosciences
IPG
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Faculty of Science
Graduate Courses
IPG 510 Rock Properties, Petrophysics, Well Log Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic formation evaluation with emphasis on determination of lithology, porosity, permeability, fluid saturation of reservoir rocks; basic principles of standard downhole wireline logging techniques (gamma ray, spontaneous potential, sonic, density, neutron, resistivity) and interpretation of downhole wireline data; review of some other advanced logging techniques; core sampling methodologies; introduction to modern laboratory petrophysical techniques; core-well log integration. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 512 Seismic Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This introduction to seismic interpretation will cover the following topics: Overview of reflection seismology; limits to seismic reflection profiling; pitfalls in seismic interpretation; petroleum systems; seismic-to-well ties and seismic phase; structural and stratigraphic interpretation; carbonate reefs and salt; direct hydrocarbon indicators and impedance inversions; amplitude variations with offset; and use of seismic attributes to assist geologic interpretations. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 514 Petroleum Basin Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classification and evolution of sedimentary basins; tectonics and sedimentation; methods of sedimentary basin analysis; basin forming mechanisms: classification of basins in a plate-tectonic context; discussion of individual basin types: controls on accommodation and stratigraphic architecture; evaluation of burial and thermal history of sedimentary basins; migration and entrapment in sedimentary basins; exploration applications of basin modeling. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 516 Petroleum Production Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of petroleum production in a modern industrial setting. Topics include relationships between geology, basic reservoir rock properties, surface and interfacial phenomena, fluid flow through porous media, classification of oil and natural gas reservoirs, and an introduction to reserve estimation principles and oil recovery strategies. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 518 Hydrocarbon Reservoir Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An analysis of the fundamental geological factors that determine the economic success of producing hydrocarbons from a reservoir: porosity, permeability, compartmentalization by depositional environment and tectonics, and reservoir conditions requiring special drilling and completion techniques. The methods appropriate to appraise a reservoir are reviewed, with an emphasis on placing the factors in the framework of risk analysis. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 601 Independent Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-3). The integrated independent research project may incorporate a variety of aspects of modern geosciences as practised in industry. Students sponsored by a company may use data from industry in these projects. Prerequisites: IPG 510, 512, 514, 516, 518 and *12 in EAS and/or GEOPH at the 500-level. [Faculty of Science]
IPG 610 Seminar and Field Trips Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). May take place all in one week. Series of seminars covering topics such as risk analysis, resource law, resource economics, land issues, environmental impact, government programs, equity markets and their regulation, reserve estimation, downstream petroleum industry, world energy supply and demand, nonconventional hydrocarbon sources. Field trips may include local Alberta geology, visits to drill rigs, enhanced oil recovery operations, and the archival core storage facilities. Attendance is mandatory. The course will be graded on a credit /no credit system. This course may require the payment of additional fees. [Faculty of Science]
#
Interdisciplinary Undergraduate and Graduate Courses
INT D
University of Alberta
Notes
(1) Courses listed below are the joint concern of the departments stated in the course descriptions. Instructions will be offered by members of one or more of the departments or Faculties listed. Responsibility for registration is with the department shown in square brackets at the end of the description.
(2) Unless otherwise indicated in the course description, an INT D course may be applied toward either the major or the minor or as an option if it appears under the department’s course listings.
Undergraduate Courses
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Courses
INT D 303 Economics of World Food and Agriculture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Economic issues in international agriculture including the world food problem; the role of agriculture in development; agricultural and food trade; biotechnology and associated environmental and globalization issues. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or 102 or consent of Department. Credit will only be given for one of INT D 303, AREC 475 and AG EC 475. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Economics and Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology). [Rural Economy]
INT D 306 Topics in Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). This course will address contemporary leadership challenges and successes. Local, national and international leaders with a wide range of expertise in academia, business, government, and volunteer, cultural and non-profit communities will speak and interact with students, providing a range of perspectives and experiences on leadership. Only open to year one students in the Certificate in Interdisciplinary Leadership Studies offered by the School of Business in collaboration with the Peter Lougheed Leadership College. [Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences]
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
Faculty of Arts Courses
INT D 125 Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. [Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
INT D 130 Communication Skills Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the skills needed to communicate effectively in academic settings through a variety of readings, exercises, tasks and workshops. Students in this course will work to develop writing, speaking, listening, and reading skills in the context of academia-specific topics. Note: Restricted to students in the Fresh Start Program who have been recommended by the Director of Fresh Start.
INT D 225 Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. [Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
INT D 241 Studies in Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of leadership models, focusing on the scientific study of leadership, evidence-based approaches to leadership development and practice, as well as followership perspectives. Prerequisite: INT D 240. (This course is jointly offered by the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Science.) [Faculty of Arts]
INT D 301 Foundations of Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). An introduction to the scholarly literature on the theory and practice of leadership. The course content will draw from a broad range of disciplines, primarily in the humanities and social sciences. The course material will be delivered on-line. Requires participation in both on-line discussion groups and on-campus seminars. Only open to year one students in the Certificate in Interdisciplinary Leadership Studies offered by the School of Business in collaboration with the Peter Lougheed Leadership College. [Faculty of Arts]
INT D 303 Economics of World Food and Agriculture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Economic issues in international agriculture including the world food problem; the role of agriculture in development; agricultural and food trade; biotechnology and associated environmental and globalization issues. Prerequisite: ECON 101 or 102 or consent of Department. Credit will only be given for one of INT D 303, AREC 475 and AG EC 475. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Economics and Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology). [Rural Economy]
INT D 311 Language Policy and Planning for Indigenous Language Communities Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Language use and attitudes about language within the socio-cultural context of Canadian Indigenous communities. Addresses issues surrounding the health and survivability of Indigenous languages in different types of family, community, and school contexts. Special attention given to Indigenous language advocacy at the family, band, national, and international levels. Training in effective grant-writing techniques included. Restricted to CILLDI program students. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Arts; Education; and Native Studies.) Prerequisite: LING 101 or LING 111. [Linguistics]
INT D 318 Technologies for Endangered Language Documentation Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Provides Canadian Indigenous language speakers with the technical skills needed to digitally archive their languages in a database or on the web with text, sound, images, and video. These digital resources can be incorporated into interactive multimedia resources for access by community-based learners and second-language teachers. Restricted to CILLDI program students. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Arts; Education; and Native Studies.) Prerequisite: LING 101 or LING 111. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 399 (Techniques for Endangered Language Documentation) or NS 380 (Technologies for Endangered Language Documentation). [Linguistics]
INT D 325 Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. [Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
INT D 350 Game Design Principles and Practice =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Team-based exploration of the formal elements of games including tabletop games, sports, live-action games, and computer games. Prerequisite: CMPUT 250 or consent of the Program. [Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
INT D 393 Political Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of how society affects politics and politics affects society. Discussion of the political consequences of economic developments, ideological debates, class conflicts, social movements, elites, gender, nationalisms and state structures. Focus on Canada from a comparative perspective. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or one of SOC 100, 202 or 300. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Political Science and Sociology.) [Political Science]
INT D 394 Introduction to Criminal Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: SOC 225. Note: Primarily for BA (Criminology) students. [Sociology]
INT D 401 Internship Capstone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). For Arts students who have just completed the on- site work experience portion in identified discipline-specific internship programs in the Faculty of Arts (see associated Department Calendar entries for details). Must be completed during the first fall or winter academic term following return to full-time studies. The course focuses on professional development, including skills in written and verbal communication and the ability to make contributions in a team environment. Students will be assigned both individual and team-based projects. Grades will be determined by performance on written assignments and oral presentations given in class. Taught in conjunction with INT D 400. This class may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in HGP 401 or PSYCO 411. Prerequisites: WKEXP 962 or WKEXP 802. [Faculty of Arts]
INT D 439 Ukrainian Dance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A theoretical and experiential investigation of the forms and history of Ukrainian dance. Course content is focused on the relationships of this dance to Ukrainian as well as Canadian culture, with consideration to its artistic and educational aspects. Offered jointly by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation and the Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies. [Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies] May be taken as a Faculty of Arts course or as a Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation course.
INT D 450 Computers and Games Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Team-based development of a complete game to be released on any computing platform. Prerequisite: CMPUT 250. [Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
INT D 520 Combined Honors Essay Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, unassigned). For students in Combined Honors programs. Permission of both Departments is required. Registration in this class may require attendance and participation in specific program seminars. Consult your program advisors. [Faculty of Arts, Undergraduate Student Services]
Faculty of Business Courses
INT D 407 Workshop in Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). Students will read articles, cases, and textbook chapters, and view selected videos before class, then in class will engage with the instructor, guests, and each other to develop an understanding of the skills that leaders need and to practice those skills. Skills will be developed in understanding and influencing others, strategy, leading creative teams, and leader communications including crises, symbolic and ceremonial speech, and the media. Only open to year two students in the Certificate in Interdisciplinary Leadership Studies offered by the School of Business in collaboration with the Peter Lougheed Leadership College. [Faculty of Business].
Faculty of Education Courses
INT D 404 Global Citizenship: Contemporary Issues and Perspectives =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course aims to provide students the opportunity to engage with current literature and experts, and to extend their own research skills as they strive to understand how global citizenship might frame the roles of individuals and communities with which they will interact in increasingly diverse social, economic, and political contexts that are not restricted by geographical or social boundaries. This course will examine select theories and case studies that focus on the constructions of global citizenship, and how citizenship is (has been) lived, denied, recreated and/or re-imagined. [Educational Policy Studies]
Faculty of Extension Courses
INT D 340 Regional Plannng Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The key issues and challenges of regional planning such as how regional planning will be examined including: historical development of regionalism in Canada and Alberta, how regionalism has helped and hindered the development of communities, nationally, provincially, locally. Students will gain experience in reviewing and critiquing concepts and theories that are characteristic of regionalism. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Open to students in the Undergraduate Program in Planning or Consent of the Instructor.
INT D 345 Rural Environments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The characteristics of rural environments that relate to current planning challenges and land use pressures will be examined. Topics such as: changing agricultural practices, rural health issues, planning for rural sustainability and the role of legislation at provincial, regional and intermunicipal levels will be discussed. Many case examples will be used throughout the course. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Open to students in the Undergraduate Program in Planning or consent of the Instructor.
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry Courses
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 457 Global Health - China Collaboration Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This is an inter-professional course with an international and intercultural component co-taught with faculty from Fudan University, and taught at Fudan University in Shanghai, China. Health science students from the University of Alberta and students from Fudan University will study the similarities and differences in health care delivery, the cultural approaches to health, and roles in global health in Canada and China. The course combines didactic presentations, small group work, student presentations and visits to health agencies in Shanghai. Please contact the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences for additional information. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry.)
Faculty of Nursing Courses
INT D 375 Intercultural Exploration of Health and Practice in Italy Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 9-3s-4 in 3 weeks). This course provides a cross-cultural interprofessional learning experience that explores the impact of differences in diet, lifestyle, and food security on patient health and practice. The students also develop an understanding of how education and citizenship influence professional identity and practice. The interdisciplinary course is taught in Italy. Available to
Faculty of Nursing students who have completed the second year or third year of the Collaborative nursing program with a minimum GPA of 2.5 in the Fall term of their second or third year; and Faculty of Pharmacy students who have completed the third year of the Pharmacy program with a minimum GPA of 2.5 in the Fall term of their third year. Prerequisite: Department consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. (Offered jointly by the Faculty of Nursing and the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.)
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences Courses
INT D 375 Intercultural Exploration of Health and Practice in Italy Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 9-3s-4 in 3 weeks). This course provides a cross-cultural interprofessional learning experience that explores the impact of differences in diet, lifestyle, and food security on patient health and practice. The students also develop an understanding of how education and citizenship influence professional identity and practice. The interdisciplinary course is taught in Italy. Available to Faculty of Nursing students who have completed the second year or third year of the Collaborative nursing program with a minimum GPA of 2.5 in the Fall term of their second or third year; and Faculty of Pharmacy students who have completed the third year of the Pharmacy program with a minimum GPA of 2.5 in the Fall term of their third year. Prerequisite: Department consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. (Offered jointly by the Faculty of Nursing and the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.)
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 457 Global Health - China Collaboration Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This is an inter-professional course with an international and intercultural component co-taught with faculty from Fudan University, and taught at Fudan University in Shanghai, China. Health science students from the University of Alberta and students from Fudan University will study the similarities and differences in health care delivery, the cultural approaches to health, and roles in global health in Canada and China. The course combines didactic presentations, small group work, student presentations and visits to health agencies in Shanghai. Please contact the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences for additional information. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry.)
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation Courses
INT D 280 The Mountain World: Introduction to Interdisciplinary Mountain Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary study of the physical and human dimensions of mountain environments. Content includes the physical (glaciers, climate, geology, etc.), biological (flora, fauna, ecology, etc.), physiological (human bodies at altitude, performance, sport, etc.), and cultural (societies, literature’s, histories, etc.) dimensions of these unique regions, as well as a critical analysis of the processes of change and influence shaping local and regional mountain environments around the globe, past and present. (Offered jointly by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation and the Faculty of Science) [Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation]
INT D 281 Integrated Mountain Studies and Skills in the Austrian Alps Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Held primarily at the University of Innsbruck’s Obergurgl Research Station in the high mountain environment of the Austrian Tyrol, this three-week study abroad course integrates both interdisciplinary mountain field studies (glaciology, geology, land use and human history, and the ecology) and physical mountain travel skills (such as summer hiking, climbing, and mountaineering). Students receive hands-on instruction in the field by mountain studies scholars from both the University of Alberta and the University of Innsbruck, as well as internationally certified mountain guides. There are no foreign language requirements. Students are responsible for their own personal gear (equipment is available to rent). Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisite: Consent from the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation.
INT D 282 Introduction to Mountain Backcountry Field Skills, Canadian Rockies/Columbias Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Held in a remote backcountry setting at the Alpine Club of Canada’s annual summer mountaineering camp, this field course is an introduction to theoretical, technical, and personal leadership skills used in basic mountain backcountry field operations for scientific research, outdoor recreation, tourism, and/or educational purposes. Students are responsible for their own personal gear (equipment is available to rent through MEC and the UofA Student Outdoors Club). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: Consent from the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of PAC 184 or INT D 282
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 439 Ukrainian Dance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A theoretical and experiential investigation of the forms and history of Ukrainian dance. Course content is focused on the relationships of this dance to Ukrainian as well as Canadian culture, with consideration to its artistic and educational aspects. Offered jointly by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation and the Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies. [Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies] May be taken as a Faculty of Arts course or as a Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation course.
Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine Courses
INT D 410 Interprofessional Health Team Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course intended to provide knowledge, skills and experience in interprofessional (IP) health care competencies. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) (Priority will be given to students in health professions where this is a required course.) [Health Sciences Council].
INT D 411 Advanced Interprofessional Team Practice Œ0.05-6 (variable) (either term, 40 hours). The course is a unique opportunity for students to gain practical, immersive interprofessional (IP) experience in a clinical setting. Health science students will enhance their IP skills and knowledge by building on the IP competencies introduced in INT D 410: interprofessional communication, interprofessional collaboration, role clarification and reflection. (Offered jointly by the following faculties: Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences; Medicine and Dentistry; Nursing; Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences; Physical Education and Recreation; and Rehabilitation Medicine.) Prerequisite: INT D 410. [Health Sciences Council].
Faculty of Science Courses
INT D 200 Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies Œ3-6 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Offered by various departments depending upon the content of the course in a given year. [Faculty of Science]
INT D 240 Scientific and Human Aspects of Global Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-3s-3). A dynamic introduction to interdisciplinary study and to the range of challenges facing society today. Insights of different disciplines in the Faculties of Arts and Science will be brought to bear by instructors in understanding and exploring several core problems and case studies of broad societal significance. The course will incorporate seminar-style discussion, collaborative work, and engaged learning projects. Prerequisite: At least *18 at the 100 level in the Faculty of Arts and/or the Faculty of Science. (This course is jointly offered by the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Science). [Faculty of Science]
INT D 280 The Mountain World: Introduction to Interdisciplinary Mountain Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary study of the physical and human dimensions of mountain environments. Content includes the physical (glaciers, climate, geology, etc.), biological (flora, fauna, ecology, etc.), physiological (human bodies at altitude, performance, sport, etc.), and cultural (societies, literature’s, histories, etc.) dimensions of these unique regions, as well as a critical analysis of the processes of change and influence shaping local and regional mountain environments around the globe, past and present. (Offered jointly by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation and the Faculty of Science) [Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation]
INT D 400 Science Internship Capstone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Required by all students who have just completed the on-site work experience portion of the Science Internship Program. Must be completed during the first fall or winter academic term following return to full- time studies. The course focuses on professional development, including skills in written and verbal communication and the ability to make contributions in a team environment. Students will be assigned both individual and team-based projects. Grades will be determined by performance on written assignments and oral presentations given in class. Taught in conjunction with INT D 401. This class may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in a Science Internship Practicum course. Prerequisites: WKEXP 956 or WKEXP 932. [Faculty of Science]
INT D 406 Capstone Course in Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5s-1.5). Investigation of the nature and use of evidence and models of scientific inquiry as they apply to theory and research in leadership. Students will work in groups with mentors to conduct an interdisciplinary capstone leadership project that addresses a significant global challenge. Only open to year two students in the Certificate in Interdisciplinary Leadership Studies offered by the School of Business in collaboration with the Peter Lougheed Leadership College. [Faculty of Science]
Graduate Courses
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
INT D 525 Commensal Bacteria and Gastrointestinal Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Integrated exploration of concepts and research methods pertaining to gastrointestinal physiology, gastrointestinal disorders, and the role of the commensal microbiota in health and disease of humans and animals. Tools to modify the function of the intestinal microflora for prevention or treatment of disease by administration of probiotic bacteria or by administration of prebiotics. Offered in odd-numbered years. Prerequisites: (*3 Microbiology or *3 Immunology) and consent of instructor. Offered jointly by the Departments of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science and Medicine. [Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science].
INT D 565 Natural Resource and Environmental Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Economic analysis of renewable resource and environmental issues. Renewable resource theory with applications to the fishery, forestry, soils and wildlife. Economic analysis of environmental protection and policy. Topics in applied benefit-cost analysis including the valuation of non-market goods and services. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor; (AREC 313 or AG EC 416) and (AREC 502 or AG EC 502) recommended. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology and Economics.) [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology].
INT D 665 Advanced Natural Resource Economics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Applied economic modeling of resource utilization and environmental issues with a focus in forestry and agriculture. Topics may include current Canadian and international issues in the area of environmental valuation, energy, climate change, biodiversity and conservation as related to Forestry and Agriculture. Prerequisite: AREC 365; AREC 313 and ECON 281 recommended. Credit will only be given for one of AREC 465 and INT D 665. Available only to students in MBA/MAg, MBA/MF, MBA in Natural Resource and Energy Programs, or by consent of the instructor. [Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology]
Faculty of Arts Courses
INT D 530 Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Faculty of Arts, Office of Interdisciplinary Studies
Faculty of Augustana Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
Faculty of Extension Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
INT D 570 Healthcare Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An interdisciplinary course exploring selected topics in bioethics. Includes examination of ethical theories and principles within the context of clinical practice (nursing, medicine, rehabilitation medicine, dentistry, pharmacy) and learning experiences to improve moral reasoning and ethical decision making. Prerequisite: consent of Instructors. [Faculty of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, John Dossetor Health Ethics Centre]
INT D 600 Building Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Transdisciplinary/interdisciplinary lecture series on maternal-fetal-newborn health are presented; Defining and navigating the challenges of conducting Interdisciplinary research, defining conceptual frameworks, research resources, research approaches to MFN health, research grant funding structures and grant review, communicating outside of academia, and a variety of maternal-fetal-newborn transdisciplinary health topics; genetics, neuroscience, pharmacology, physiology, nursing, health population outcomes. Four projects involving transdisciplinary/interdisciplinary composition related to the lecture series will be required.
INT D 670 Research Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines the ethical issues which arise in research involving human subjects. Research methods studied may include clinical trials, surveys, secondary analysis of stored data, and the observation of public behavior. Problems encountered in studying particular populations, such as children or persons with dementia, will also be studied. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. [Faculty of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, John Dossetor Health Ethics Centre].
Faculty of Nursing Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
INT D 540 Principles of Qualitative Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course covers the basics of qualitative research including theoretical underpinnings, main methods, sampling, data collection, analysis and proposal writing. It serves as a strong introduction to qualitative inquiry. This course is designed as a graduate seminar. While some classes will be structured, the intent is to learn from each other’s experiences and their research examples. Credit will not be granted to students who have previously received credit for INT D 560 -Principles of Qualitative Inquiry.
INT D 570 Healthcare Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An interdisciplinary course exploring selected topics in bioethics. Includes examination of ethical theories and principles within the context of clinical practice (nursing, medicine, rehabilitation medicine, dentistry, pharmacy) and learning experiences to improve moral reasoning and ethical decision making. Prerequisite: consent of Instructors. [Faculty of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, John Dossetor Health Ethics Centre]
INT D 577 Spiritual Assessment in the Promotion of Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). As an element of whole person health assessment, “spiritual assessment” is of interest to a broad spectrum of health as well as ministry professionals. Emphasis is placed on consideration of theories and skills needed for the practice of spiritual assessment. The course provides a context for interdisciplinary reflection on understandings of the human person, health, health promotion, spirituality, spiritual needs, and spiritual care. Students are invited to explore their own spirituality and various approaches to assessing the spiritual based on a variety of definitions and understandings of spirituality. Specific models and tools for spiritual assessment will be considered, two will be looked at in depth, and students will have opportunities to bring theory as well as experience together in both group and individual exercises of spiritual assessment rooted in their ministry/health practice.
INT D 609 Synthesizing Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The objective of this course is to provide students with knowledge, methodological skills, and guidance through all steps of conducting a variety of systematic literature reviews. Topics include developing a research question, literature searching, managing references, selecting studies, quality assessment, data extraction, synthesizing evidence, heterogeneity, and interpretation of evidence. Readings and seminar discussions focus on critical judgment factors that reviewers must make to enhance rigor in their review. This course addresses reviews of quantitative and qualitative. It provides a foundation for those interested in conducting intensive qualitative or quantitative reviews. Prerequisites: A graduate course in Statistics and a graduate course in Research Design, and permission of the instructor.
INT D 660 Selected Topics in PhD Studies in Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). Selected topics in nursing at the doctoral level.
INT D 670 Research Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines the ethical issues which arise in research involving human subjects. Research methods studied may include clinical trials, surveys, secondary analysis of stored data, and the observation of public behavior. Problems encountered in studying particular populations, such as children or persons with dementia, will also be studied. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. [Faculty of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, John Dossetor Health Ethics Centre].
INT D 690 Topics in Knowledge Utilization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course examines the scientific, theoretical, and historical underpinnings of the distinct but related fields of knowledge utilization, knowledge translation and innovation diffusion. Attention is given to contemporary manifestations in Canadian society such as evidence-based/evidence-informed decision-making, and in health care such as evidence-based medicine, and evidence-based practice. Particular attention will be given to the challenges of knowledge use in complex organizations and in the use of strategies to increase the use of knowledge, primarily although not exclusively the use of scientific knowledge. The course will focus on the central conceptual and methodological challenges in the field.
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
School of Public Health Courses
INT D 500 An Introduction to Community-Based Participatory Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to conceptual and methodological foundations of community-based participatory research in the health and social sciences.
#
Italian
ITAL
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with an Italian language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS).
ITAL 111 Beginners’ Italian I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Italian grammar and pronunciation. Readings of easy texts dealing with different aspects of Italian culture. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ITAL 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Italian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
ITAL 112 Beginners’ Italian II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: ITAL 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ITAL 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Italian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
ITAL 205 Topics in Italian Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Modern Italy studied through its cultural context and forms of expression. The course will be taught in English.
ITAL 211 Second-Year Italian I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Selected contemporary prose and poetry. Advanced grammar and phonetics. Prerequisite: Italian 30 (or equivalent) or ITAL 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ITAL 250.
ITAL 212 Second-Year Italian II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: ITAL 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in ITAL 250.
ITAL 300 Advanced Italian =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: ITAL 212 or consent of Department.
ITAL 340 Topics in Italian Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: ITAL 212 or consent of Department.
ITAL 363 Studies in Italian Literary Genres =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: ITAL 212 or consent of Department.
ITAL 415 Studies in Italian Literature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: A 300-level course in Italian literature or consent of Department.
ITAL 419 Topics in Italian Studies I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: A 300-level course in Italian literature or consent of Department.
ITAL 425 Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literary and technical translation from English to Italian. Prerequisite: ITAL 393 or consent of Department.
ITAL 495 Honors Thesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Japanese
JAPAN
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with an Asian (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course suitable to their level of ability or they may be encouraged to seek “Credit by Special Assessment” (see Classics) when appropriate.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level courses, credit may be withheld.
Undergraduate Courses
JAPAN 101 Basic Japanese I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A non-intensive written course designed to develop basic skills in spoken and written Japanese. Note: Not open to students with credit in Japanese 30, 35, JAPAN 150 or equivalent.
JAPAN 102 Basic Japanese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of JAPAN 101. Prerequisite: JAPAN 101 or equivalent. Note: Not open to students with credit in Japanese 30, 35, JAPAN 150 or equivalent.
JAPAN 150 First-Year University Japanese =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A non-intensive course designed for students who have some previous knowledge of spoken and written Japanese but need further training in grammar. Prerequisite: Japanese 30, 35 or equivalent.
JAPAN 201 Basic Japanese III =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A non-intensive course designed to develop further basic skills in spoken and written Japanese. Prerequisite: JAPAN 102 or 150 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 202 Basic Japanese IV =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of JAPAN 201. Prerequisite: JAPAN 201 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 301 Intermediate Japanese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Designed to develop basic reading skills in modern Japanese prose with special emphasis on grammar and usage. Prerequisite: JAPAN 202 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 302 Intermediate Japanese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). A continuation of JAPAN 301. Prerequisite: JAPAN 301 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 341 Classical Japanese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the classical Japanese language, involving study of classical Japanese grammar and reading of primary texts. Not a literature course. Prerequisite: JAPAN 202 or consent of the Department. JAPAN 241 recommended.
JAPAN 401 Advanced Japanese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced course designed to develop skills in spoken and written Japanese with special emphasis on the acquisition of an extensive vocabulary. Prerequisite: JAPAN 302 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 402 Advanced Japanese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A continuation of JAPAN 401. Prerequisite: JAPAN 401 with a minimum grade of C+, or consent of Department.
JAPAN 429 Japanese-English Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice in translation as applied to Japanese and English literary and non-literary texts. Prerequisite or corequisite: JAPAN 401 or consent of Department.
JAPAN 439 Practical Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The practice of translation in media, government, and business. Prerequisite: JAPAN 429 or consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
JAPAN 500 Topics in Japanese Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A reading knowledge of Japanese is required. May be repeated for credit when course content differs.
JAPAN 502 Methods of Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice of historical and critical approaches to premodern and modern Japanese literature. A reading knowledge of Japanese is required.
JAPAN 503 Colloquia in Japanese Language Research Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). Seminars on research in Japanese language. Prerequisites: advanced knowledge of Japanese is required and consent of the Department. May be repeated when course content differs. Not open to web registration.
JAPAN 523 Advanced Studies in Japanese Religions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Consent of the Department. May be repeated for credit when course content differs.
JAPAN 598 Topics in Pre-Modern Japanese Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Graduate students specializing in pre-modern Japanese literature must take JAPAN 598 at least once. May be repeated for credit when course content differs. A reading knowledge of Classical Japanese is required.
JAPAN 599 Topics in Japanese Literature, Premodern and Modern Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). JAPAN 599 must be taken at least once and may be repeated for credit when course content differs. A reading knowledge of Japanese is required.
#
Kinesiology
KIN
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Undergraduate Courses
Note: Enrolment in all KIN courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation, or to students registered in specified programs that require KIN courses to meet degree requirements. Other students must obtain approval of the Faculty.
KIN 100 Human Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Introductory study of human anatomy. Students learn structural and functional components of selected systems of the human body. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 100 or PEDS 100.
KIN 101 Introduction to Human Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to human physiology from the cellular to systemic level with special emphasis on systems that adapt to exercise stress. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 101 or PEDS 101.
KIN 103 Integrative Human Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to integrative human physiology. Focuses on the regulation, control, and integration of cellular functions in the human body with special emphasis on systems that respond to exercise stress. Prerequisite: KIN 101. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 101 or PEDS 101.
KIN 109 Statistics, Measurement, and Evaluation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses largely upon the application of descriptive and inferential statistics in the context of quantitative research. The course also introduces students to basic principles surrounding measurement error, test reliability, and validity. Note: Students cannot receive credit for KIN 109 if they received credit for PEDS 109 or PEDS 309, PSYCO 211, SOC 210, STAT 141, or STAT 151.
KIN 200 Physiology of Exercise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). An introduction to acute physiological responses to exercise and chronic adaptations to training. Prerequisite: KIN 101. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 200 or PEDS 200.
KIN 203 Skill Acquisition and Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course presents a psychological approach to understanding human motor behaviour. The course examines the processes involved in learning motor skills and controlling movement, and the factors that influence acquisition and performance. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 203 or PEDS 203.
KIN 205 Introduction to Outdoor Environmental Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). A conceptual and experiential introduction to outdoor environmental education and leadership. In addition to weekly lecture and lab components, the course includes weekend commitments. Note: Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 205 or PEDS 205.
KIN 206 Biomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the biomechanics of human movement. A qualitative approach is used in the study of key biomechanics concepts and principles as they are applied to sport and exercise. Prerequisite: KIN 100. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 206 or PEDS 206.
KIN 207 Physical Growth and Psychomotor Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the sequential changes in physical growth and motor development with emphasis on individual difference. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 207 or 307, PEDS 207 or 307.
KIN 209 Research Methods in Kinesiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of research in kinesiology with emphasis on practical application of research techniques and designs. Prerequisite: KIN 109 or 309, STAT 141 or 151. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 209 or 409, PEDS 209 or 409.
KIN 240 Introduction to Sports Injury Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Analysis of practical and theoretical concepts of sports injury. Includes an overview of sports medicine, care and prevention of injuries, and safety in athletics and physical education. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: KIN 100. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 240 or PEDS 240.
KIN 245 Introduction to the Profession of Coaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the principles of coaching as they relate to the development of the athlete, the role of the coach, and organization of sport in contemporary society. Designed to present basic coaching theory that is applicable to a variety of sport settings with the focus on the practice and the season. Note: Credit will only granted for one of KIN 245 or PEDS 245 or 345.
KIN 246 Coaching Practicum I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Students will be required to coach for a complete season in a program approved by the student’s Mentor Coach. The purpose of the practicum is to provide the student with a practical coaching experience under the guidance of a Program Coach. It is intended to introduce the student to the demands of the profession of coaching. Note: at least 100 hours of outside- classroom time is required. Corequisite: KIN 245. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 246 or PEDS 246.
KIN 293 Introduction to the Movement Activities of Children Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-2). A study of developmentally appropriate movement activities for children. Students will participate and work with children in a variety of physical activities in recreational, educational and sport environments. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 293 or PEDS 293.
KIN 294 A Conceptual Approach to Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An exploration of the principles and concepts that underlie movement of individuals and groups in a variety of settings. Through examination of and experience in a wide range of physical activities and their contexts, the focus of the course is on the development of a conceptual understanding of movement. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of PAC 101 or KIN 294 or PEDS 294.
KIN 302 Human Motor Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Presents a multi-level approach that focuses on the neural foundations underlying the control of movement. Prerequisite: KIN 103. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 302 or PEDS 302.
KIN 303 Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces the student to the field of sport psychology and to select psychological theories as they relate to sport and physical activity. Psychological constructs along with their theoretical perspectives will be viewed within cognitive, emotional, and behavioural frameworks. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 303 or PEDS 303.
KIN 306 Quantitative Biomechanics of Human Movement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Application of the principles of mechanics to the measurement, analysis and interpretation of human movement. Laboratories emphasize utilization of commonly available technologies for movement analysis. Prerequisite: KIN 206 or PHYS 124. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 306 or PEDS 306.
KIN 311 Assessment of Fitness and Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Students will gain knowledge in fitness, health and research appraisal. Emphasis will be given to validity and reliability of various assessments and factors involved in the assessment of performance and health assessment. Prerequisites: KIN 200 and KIN 109, or KIN 309 or STAT 141 or 151. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 311 or PEDS 311.
KIN 334 Physical Activity, Nutrition and Energy Balance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on the components of energy expenditure and energy intake. Other topics include the regulation of body composition, nutritional requirements for athletes, eating disorders, and obesity. Prerequisite: KIN 200. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 334 or PEDS 334.
KIN 335 Advanced Conditioning Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A survey of the theoretical bases of conditioning programs. The course emphasis is on the nature of physiological adaptation to selected training regimens and the factors which influence the adaptive process. Prerequisite: KIN 200 (no concurrent registration). Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 335 or PEDS 335.
KIN 338 Physical Activity and Sport Participation in Children and Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course focuses upon a wide range of issues surrounding the involvement of children and youth in structured and unstructured physical activity and sport settings. Psycho-social, emotional, intellectual, physical, and environmental conditions that influence, or are influenced by, physical activity and sport participation in children and youth are discussed. Course content is delivered through lectures and experiential activities. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 338 or PEDS 338.
KIN 346 Coaching Practicum II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Students will be required to coach for a complete season, preferably with High Performance athletes, in a program approved by the student’s Mentor Coach. The student should expect to assume more responsibility than in KIN 246, either in program or athlete development. The guidance of a highly qualified Head Coach is essential. It is intended to introduce the student to the demands of coaching in a High Performance-oriented program. Note: At least 150 hours of outside-classroom time is required. Prerequisite: KIN 246. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 346 or PEDS 346.
KIN 347 Applied Coaching Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the practice of coaching with an emphasis on the number of advanced social science concepts and theories as they apply to effective coaching. The position of the “athlete as a learner” will be central to this course so that students/coaches and pedagogical process centered around human interaction and development. Prerequisite: KIN 245. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 347 or PEDS 347.
KIN 372 Neuroscience Considerations for Adapted Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course uses a physiological approach to examine how neuromuscular impairments present barriers to participation in physical activity for people experiencing disability. Examples covered in class may include involuntary muscle contraction, fatigue and pain that arise due to a number of different physiological mechanisms. Prerequisites: PERLS 207, KIN 101, and KIN 103. Note: Credit will be granted or only one of KIN 372 or PEDS 372.
KIN 385 Physical Activity and the Aging Adult Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the role of physical activity on the health and lifestyle of aging adults. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 385 or PEDS 385. PEDS 385 was formerly PEDS 484. Credit will only be granted for one of these courses.
KIN 391 Introduction to Human Anatomy and Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to the anatomy and physiology of human body. Emphasis is on introductory knowledge and practical implications of the structural and functional characteristics and capacities of the human body. Note: Degree Credit is not available for BKin, BKin/BEd, or BScKin students. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 391 or PEDS 391.
KIN 398 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation or approved research affiliate. Normally for students in their third year of study. Prerequisite: KIN 209 or 409 and consent of the Associate Dean (Undergraduate Programs). Students must arrange a project with an academic staff member or approved research affiliate. Enrolment is limited and preference will be given to students with GPA of 3.0 and above on their most recent *30.
KIN 399 Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation or approved research affiliate. Normally for students in their third year of study. Prerequisite: KIN 209 or 409 and consent of the Associate Dean (Undergraduate Programs). Students must arrange a project with an academic staff member or approved research affiliate. Enrolment is limited and preference will be given to students with GPA of 3.0 and above on their most recent *30.
KIN 400 Human Gross Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The course is designed to provide in-depth information on the structure of the human body. Lectures and laboratories emphasize the anatomical relationship in the extremities and the trunk as they relate to human movement, athletic therapy, and fitness. Lectures are followed by dissections of the human body and prosection demonstrations. Prerequisite: KIN 100. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 400 or PEDS 400.
KIN 401 Applied Ethics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). A philosophical examination of ethical questions in the professional practice of physical education and sport. Prerequisite: PERLS 104. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 401 or PEDS 401.
KIN 402 Human Factors and Ergonomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The abilities and limitations of human performance are examined with respect to how we interact with tasks and objects in our environment. Work systems will be analyzed and evaluated in terms of the capabilities and limitations of human participants. This approach can be taken from a number of different and interrelated perspectives such as biomechanics, motor behaviour, motor control, and physiology. Prerequisites: KIN 203 and KIN 206. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 402 or PEDS 402.
KIN 403 The Application of Psychological Skills to Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The direct application of select psychological skills to sport and physical activity. A strong emphasis is placed on how to apply psychological skills in a variety of settings. Prerequisite: KIN 303. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 403 or PEDS 403.
KIN 410 A Systems Neuroscience Approach to Human Motor Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will offer an exploration of human motor behaviour by focusing on several key networks in the central nervous system involved in producing human movement. For each network, students will be given an overview of the key principles and components. Then, for that network, they will work on self-directed projects that will require ether: 1) a summary of contemporary research being conducted regarding the functioning of that network or 2) a case-study summary or research review of impairments that arise when that network is disrupted. Examples of networks that will be explored include the cortical control of action selection and the spinal “pattern generators” that control locomotion. Prerequisites: KIN 203, 209, and 302. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 410 or PEDS 410.
KIN 411 Physiology of Emergency Response Occupations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Explores selected issues of work physiology related to emergency response occupations with the main emphasis on fire fighting. Topics will include: human rights legislation and policies related to bona fide occupational requirements; the assessment of workload; the physiological limitations to work capacity; the development and implementation of physical fitness testing programs for applicants and incumbents; and, the development and monitoring of fitness training programs related to work demands. Prerequisite: KIN 335. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 411 or PEDS 411.
KIN 412 Selected Topics in Advanced Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers the acute and chronic response to exercise through an increased understanding of the mechanisms and adaptations that occur within the human body. Invited guest speakers will present topics of current interest that may include different sport modalities, different populations or different disease states to assist in the exploration of the field of exercise science. Prerequisites: KIN 200 and KIN 209 or 409. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 412 or PEDS 412.
KIN 413 Cardiopulmonary Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the functions, control and integration of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. It is designed to increase the student’s knowledge of regulation and integration of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems in health and disease. Responses and adaptations to acute and chronic exercise will be used as a foundation upon which the concepts of control and integration will be explored. Clinical applications (e.g. exercise, high altitude) and pathophysiology (e.g. type 2 diabetes, heart disease) will be reviewed. Prerequisite: KIN 200. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 413 or PEDS 413.
KIN 434 Physical Activity and Chronic Disease Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of physical activity in the management of chronic diseases will be discussed. Chronic diseases will include: metabolic, cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases, as well as cancer. The implications of pathophysiology in performing safe/effective exercise prescription and evaluation will be considered. Physical activity guidelines will be examined within the context of other clinical practice guidelines (e.g., pharmacology). Prerequisite: KIN 334. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 434 or PEDS 434.
KIN 440 Advanced Sports Injury Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A developmental kinesiological approach to musculoskeletal injury management. Includes an analysis of practical and theoretical concepts; overview of musculoskeletal injury assessment, rehabilitation of injuries, and safety in return to activity. Prerequisite: KIN 240.
KIN 444 Communication Skills and Strategies in Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0). Through experiential learning activities, students will develop communication skills that will enhance their effectiveness as professionals in sport and physical activity settings. Students will explore distinctions of communication and conversations in a workshop format. Sample topics include self-awareness, listening, and interpersonal communication. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 444 or PEDS 444.
KIN 446 Coaching Practicum III Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, variable). Students will be required to coach for a complete season, preferably as a Head Coach, in a program approved by the student’s Mentor Coach. The purpose of this practicum is to provide the students with the practical coaching experience of running their own program for one complete season. It is intended to familiarize the students with the demands of being a Head Coach. Note: at least 250 hours of outside-classroom time is required. Prerequisite: KIN 346. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 446 or PEDS 446.
KIN 447 Advanced Topics in Coaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of advanced topics in coaching as they relate to the development of the athlete, the coach, and the organization of sport in contemporary society. Designed to present coaching theory that will guide rising coaches in the development of sport programs that will positively contribute to Canadian society and its sport development model. Prerequisites: KIN 245 or Consent of Instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 447 or PEDS 447.
KIN 471 Physical Activity for Individuals with Developmental Impairments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). A focus on the delivery of adapted physical activity services to individuals with developmental impairments with a focus on the instruction of movement skills. Theory and practice will be integrated through lecture and lab activities. Prerequisite: PERLS 207. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 471 or PEDS 471.
KIN 472 Physical Activity for Individuals with Physical Impairments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). An examination of instructional models and program implementation considerations for creating and augmenting physical activity opportunities for persons with physical impairments. The assumptions underlying actions which include and exclude will be examined. Prerequisite: PERLS 207. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 472 or PEDS 472.
KIN 490 Professional Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, variable). A half-time unpaid Professional Practicum of 20 hours per week for 14 weeks, or the equivalent time. Students must arrange placements through the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor. A limited number of placements are available. Note: Students will not be allowed to register in more than *9 concurrently with KIN 490 unless approved by the Practicum Supervisor/ Instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 490 or PEDS 490.
KIN 492 Professional Practicum Œ9 (fi 18) (variable, variable). A half-time unpaid Professional Practicum of 20 hours per week for 14 weeks, or the equivalent time. Students must arrange placements through the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor. A limited number of placements are available. Note: Students will not be allowed to register in more than *9 concurrently with KIN 492 unless approved by the Practicum Supervisor/ Instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 492 or PEDS 492.
KIN 493 Professional Practicum Œ15 (fi 30) (variable, variable). A full-time unpaid Professional Practicum of 35- 40 hours per week for 14 weeks, or the equivalent time. Students must arrange placements through the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor. Note: Students will not be allowed to register in any other course concurrently with KIN 493 unless approved by the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 493 or PEDS 493.
KIN 497 Selected Topics in Physical Education and Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course offered on a topic of current interest in physical education and sport. Topics may vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
KIN 498 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation or approved research affiliate. Normally for students in their fourth year of study. Prerequisite: KIN 209 or 409 and consent of the Associate Dean (Undergraduate Programs). Students must arrange a project with an academic staff member or approved research affiliate. Enrolment is limited and preference will be given to students with GPA of 3.0 and above on their most recent *30.
KIN 499 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course designed to meet the needs of individual students. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
Graduate Courses
KIN 500 Seminar in Biomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 500 or PEDS 500.
KIN 511 Exercise Testing and Exercise Prescription Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-1s-2). The theory and practice of exercise tests, interpretation, and exercise prescription for selected populations. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 511 or PEDS 511.
KIN 512 Selected Topics in Advanced Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers the acute and chronic response to exercise through an increased understanding of the mechanisms and adaptations that occur within the human body. Invited guest speakers will present topics of current interest that may include different sport modalities, different populations or different disease states to assist in the exploration of the field of exercise science. Lectures are the same as for KIN 412, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in KIN 412. Prerequisites: Consent of Faculty. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 512 or PEDS 512.
KIN 513 Cardiopulmonary Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the functions, control and integration of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. It is designed to increase the student’s knowledge of regulation and integration of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems in health and disease. Responses and adaptations to acute and chronic exercise will be used as a foundation upon which the concepts of control and integration will be explored. Clinical applications (e.g., exercise, high altitude) and pathophysiology (e.g., Type 2 diabetes, heart disease) will be reviewed. Prerequisite: KIN 200. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained for KIN 413. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 513 or PEDS 513.
KIN 514 Sport Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A survey of selected topics in exercise physiology with emphasis on application to sport. The course will normally include study of metabolic, cardio-pulmonary, neuromuscular and environmental physiology with reference to training and competition. Prerequisite: KIN 200 or equivalent. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 514 or PEDS 514.
KIN 517 Histochemical and Biochemical Techniques in Exercise Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-3). This is primarily a laboratory experience for students to gain competencies in performing basic histochemical and biochemical procedures that are common in exercise physiology research. Prerequisite: Consent of the Instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 517 or PEDS 517.
KIN 518 Hormonal Response to Exercise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-2s-0). Designed to increase the student’s knowledge about normal endocrine physiology and the hormonal response to acute and chronic exercise. Variables that influence the hormonal response to exercise and its subsequent measurement in circulation will be addressed. The use of hormonal analysis for monitoring health, body composition and training status of athletes will also be discussed. Offered in alternate years. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 518 or PEDS 518.
KIN 530 Adapted Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Seminar on current theoretical, practical and research issues in adapted physical activity. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 530 or PEDS 530.
KIN 540 The Psychology of Performance Enhancement in Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar focuses on the role of psychology as it relates to performance enhancement in the areas of sport and physical activity. Performance constructs and skills along with mental skills training programs will be discussed and evaluated. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 540 or PEDS 540.
KIN 541 Positive Youth Development Through Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Positive Youth Development (PYD) is a strength- based conception of childhood and adolescence. From the PYD Perspective, youth are viewed as ‘resources to be developed’ rather than ‘problems to be managed.’ Through this course the potential for promoting positive youth development through sport and physical activity will be explored. Prerequisites: KIN 403, or equivalent, or permission of the instructor. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 541 or PEDS 541.
KIN 544 Psychosocial Dimensions of Athletic Behaviour in the Competitive Sport Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A theoretical analysis of psychosocial constructs in sport including competitive anxiety, motivation, perfectionism, burnout, aggression, moral reasoning, enjoyment, and sport injury. Frequently examines the construct validation processes that researchers employ in the development of latent constructs and associated nomological networks. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 544 or PEDS 544.
KIN 545 Physical Activity and Cancer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An overview of the role of physical activity in cancer control. Specifically, physical activity is examined for its role in cancer prevention, coping with treatments, rehabilitation after treatments, palliative care, long term survival, secondary prevention and survival. A multidisciplinary perspective draws on kinesiology, oncology, nursing, epidemiology, psychology, rehabilitation medicine and health promotion. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of KIN 545 or PEDS 545.
KIN 572 Coaching Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Students will be required to coach for a complete season as head coach or assistant coach with major responsibilities in High Performance program approved by the student’s Coaching Mentor. The purpose of the practicum is to provide students with practical experience of running their own High Performance program for an entire duration of 1 annual cycle that will include 1 competitive season. Note: a minimum of 250 hours of outside-classroom time is required. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
#
Korean
KOREA
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with an Asian (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course suitable to their level of ability or they may be encouraged to seek “Credit by Special Assessment” (see Classics) when appropriate.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level courses, credit may be withheld.
Undergraduate Courses
KOREA 101 Basic Korean I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to Korean. Note: Designed for beginners and not open to students with previous knowledge of Korean.
KOREA 102 Basic Korean II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of KOREA 101. Prerequisite: KOREA 101 or consent of Department. Note: Designed for beginners and not open to students with previous knowledge of Korean.
KOREA 201 Basic Korean III =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Basic communication in modern Korean, integrating speaking, listening, reading and writing. Prerequisite: KOREA 102 or consent of Department.
KOREA 202 Basic Korean IV =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of KOREA 201. Prerequisite: KOREA 201 or consent of Department.
KOREA 301 Intermediate Korean I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Intermediate communication in modern Korean, integrating speaking, listening, reading and writing. Prerequisite: KOREA 202 or consent of Department.
KOREA 302 Intermediate Korean II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: KOREA 301 or consent of Department.
KOREA 401 Advanced Korean I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Studies in Korean language, culture and customs through readings and activities. Emphasis on sound patterns, grammatical structure, communication, comprehension, and composition. Prerequisite: KOREA 302 or equivalent.
KOREA 402 Advanced Korean II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A continuation of KOREA 401. Prerequisite: KOREA 401 or equivalent.
#
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
LABMP
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
LABMP 400 Introduction to Human Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lecture sessions on the study of human disease are presented. The causes and general mechanisms of disease with selected specific examples from various organ systems are discussed. Disease related structural and functional changes at the molecular, cellular and tissue level are presented, and how these changes can be appreciated by various laboratory methods. The discipline bridges basic science and clinical medicine. Prerequisites: PHYSL *6, BIOCH *3. Credit can be obtained in only 1 of LABMP 400 or LABMP 500
Graduate Courses
LABMP 500 Introduction to Human Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lecture sessions on the study of human disease are presented (LABMP 400). The causes and general mechanisms of disease with selected specific examples from various organ systems are discussed. Disease related structural and functional changes at the molecular, cellular and tissue level are presented, and how these changes can be appreciated by various laboratory methods. A written review of scientific literature on a specific topic in Pathology will be required. Prerequisites: Credit may only be obtained in one of LABMP 400 or LABMP 500.
LABMP 510 Cryobiology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 2-1s-0). Physiochemical changes in aqueous solutions at low temperatures and responses of living cells and tissues to those changes. Current theories of damage and protection during freezing and thawing. Prerequisite: consent of Department. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in PATH 510.
LABMP 511 Cryobiology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 2-1s-0). Freeze-thaw responses of enzyme systems, individual cells and organized tissues. Preservation of spermatozoa, blood and bone marrow cells, embryos and various tissues. Approaches to the cryopreservation of organs and whole organisms. Applications in medicine and agriculture. Prerequisite: consent of Department. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in PATH 511.
LABMP 530 Experimental Design and Scientific Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-3s-0). This course is designed to develop the skills of graduate students in the areas of critical review of clinical and basic science literature, experimental study design, research ethics, concepts in oral and poster presentations of scientific research, abstract writing for clinical and basic science conferences, as well as how to maximize the scientific conference experience. Active class discussion is a component of each lecture, with group and individual assignments to give practical experiences to each student immediately applicable to their graduate research program. Open to graduate students and clinical residents in the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. Students from other faculties may register with consent of the instructors.
LABMP 535 Practical Tools for Scientific Research Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). This course utilizes a workshop format designed to develop the skills of graduate students and clinical residents in scientific writing (i.e. literature reviews, manuscripts, grant applications), research budget planning, developing effective collaborations, intellectual property and technology transfer. An overview of the safety requirements WHMIS, radiation safety, and biological hazards) in order to conduct scientific research. Students will learn how to prepare an ethics application for the use of animals and humans in research. Guest speakers from academia, government and industry are featured. Open to graduate students and clinical residents in the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. Students from other faculties may register with consent of the instructors.
LABMP 540 Directed Reading in Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Reading and study of basic laboratory medicine and pathology topics relevant to the student’s chosen field of study under the direction of one or more faculty members. Prerequisite: Consent of Graduate Co-ordinator, Laboratory Medicine and Pathology.
LABMP 550 Analytical and Environmental Toxicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will integrate knowledge and practical skills in the areas of environmental chemistry and toxicology. The student will learn to predict how chemicals can move and transform in the environment based on physical and chemical properties, how this affects human and environmental exposure, and consequences thereof for health. The basic principles of toxicology will be taught and students will gain appreciation for the diversity of physiological and/or biochemical mechanisms by which toxicants cause their adverse effects, and the various defenses our bodies have evolved to employ. Open to graduate students in Laboratory Medicine and Pathology. Students from other departments may register with consent of the instructor.
LABMP 551 Laboratory Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2.5-0-0.5). Theory and practice of laboratory research techniques and methods. Fundamentals and applications of quantitative analysis, separation, atomic spectrometry, mass spectrometry, PCR and cloning with laboratory experiments. For students who will perform laboratory research. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has been received in PHS 513. Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor.
LABMP 552 Toxicology and Regulation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will help students develop the understanding and skills to apply research results to real world needs for the management of risks posed by environmental contaminants as well as the development of regulation and policy involving such management. Open to graduate students in Laboratory Medicine and Pathology. Students from other departments may register with consent of the instructor.
LABMP 553 Advanced Environmental Toxicology Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will focus on hazardous toxicant identification and assessment of effects. It will examine exposure and effects of toxicants on a number of different levels including a) molecular effects, b) tissue effects, c) individual and organismal effects, and d) population effects. Case studies will be used to illustrate different applications and the utilization of specific approaches to hazard identification and assessment. The concept of Adverse Outcome Pathways (AOPs) will be introduced and students will be responsible for developing their own AOP for a specific toxicity.
LABMP 581 Techniques in Molecular Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-5). A laboratory course emphasizing introductory and advanced techniques in molecular biology (MLSCI 481). Isolation of RNA, Northern blotting, construction of cDNA, amplification of DNA by the polymerase chain reaction, analysis of DNA by restriction digestion, transfection of eukaryotic cells for protein expression and Western blotting analysis. Prerequisites: GENET and BIOCH 200 and BIOCH 330 and consent of the Department. A written review of scientific literature on a topic in molecular biology will be required. This course is designed for graduate students. Credit may only be obtained in one of MLSCI 481 or LABMP 581.
LABMP 590 Technology and the Future of Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). A lecture and seminar course describing the future effects of technology on medicine in both the developed and developing world, the promise and perils of biotech, nanotech, and artificial intelligence, and changing character of research and practice of medicine and pathology in the coming decades, and the technological singularity. Each student will carry out a project supervised by a faculty member and give a presentation. This course is designed for graduate students in the Faculties of Medicine, Science, or Arts, and is open to undergraduates in those Faculties with consent of Department.
LABMP 593 Systematic Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-3s-0). This course will provide an in-depth review of body organ systems and disease through lectures and seminars. This course is designed primarily for students enrolled in the Pathologists’ Assistant specialization.
LABMP 594 Anatomic Pathology Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). This course will provide an introduction to the role of the Pathologists’ Assistant in the clinical laboratory and principles of techniques used in the anatomic pathology laboratory, along with interactive demonstrations. Topics will include laboratory safety, review of specimen types encountered in the laboratory, specimen handling, submission of tissue and material for ancillary studies, gross description and dissection techniques, autopsy techniques, and photography. This course is designed primarily for students enrolled in the Pathologists’ Assistant specialization.
LABMP 595 Laboratory Management Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3s-0). This seminar course offers topics for consideration in the administration of the clinical laboratory. Topics include finance, organizational behavior, change management, human resource management, collective agreements, safety, risk management, ethics, the Health Professions Act, equipment acquisition, contracts, accreditation, and materials management. This course is designed primarily for students enrolled in the Pathologists’ Assistant specialization.
LABMP 597 Pathologists’ Assistant Clinical Practicum II Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 4 months). As a part of practicum education for the Pathologists’ Assistant specialization, this course will provide rotations in autopsy, surgical pathology, pediatric pathology and forensic pathology. The student will be expected to cover specific competencies and objectives and keep a record of cases encountered. A designated preceptor in each rotation will guide student learning and continuously assess student progress.
LABMP 598 Pathologists’ Assistant Clinical Practicum III Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 4 months). As a part of practicum education for the Pathologists’ Assistant specialization, this course will provide rotations in autopsy, surgical pathology, pediatric pathology and forensic pathology. The student will be expected to cover specific competencies and objectives and keep a record of cases encountered. A designated preceptor in each rotation will guide student learning and continuously assess student progress.
LABMP 900 Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-6). The course is an independent research project supervised by a pathologist, pathologist’s assistant or researcher. The student will choose the advisor and research project. The advisor will provide mentorship for the project. Seminar sessions cover topics relevant to conducting independent scientific research. The student will be expected to write a research proposal, keep an accurate laboratory notebook, and conduct adequate experimental research. The project will be written as a research paper and presented at departmental rounds.
#
Latin
LATIN
Department of History and Classics Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) Prerequisite for all 400-level Latin courses: LATIN 302, or consent of Department.
(2) For additional related courses see Classics (CLASS) and Greek (GREEK) listings.
Undergraduate Courses
LATIN 101 Beginners’ Latin I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Elements of Latin grammar and reading of simple texts. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in Latin 30 or LATIN 100.
LATIN 102 Beginners’ Latin II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A continuation of LATIN 101. Students who intend to proceed to LATIN 301 are strongly encouraged to register in LATIN 104. Prerequisite: LATIN 101 or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in LATIN 104.
LATIN 104 Beginners’ Latin II (For Further Study) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Continuation of LATIN 101 for those who intend to proceed to LATIN 301. Prerequisite: LATIN 101 or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in LATIN 102.
LATIN 301 Intermediate Latin I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Review of grammar; reading of Latin texts; translation of simple sentences from English into Latin. Prerequisite: LATIN 102 or 104 or consent of Department.
LATIN 302 Intermediate Latin II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selections from Latin poetry and prose. Prerequisite: LATIN 301 or consent of Department.
LATIN 406 Topics in Latin Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 410 Topics in Latin Prose Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 468 Topics in Latin Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 499 Individual Study in Latin Authors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 500 Fourth-Year Honors Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
LATIN 506 Topics in Latin Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 510 Topics in Latin Prose Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 562 Topics in Latin Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
LATIN 599 Supervised Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LATIN 699 Conference Course Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Latin American Studies
LA ST
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) All LA ST courses are taught in English.
(2) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS).
Undergraduate Courses
LA ST 205 Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Regional similarities and national differences. An introduction to Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean today, including, Spanish, French, and Creole speaking countries through study of their cultural contexts and forms of expression.
LA ST 210 South America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Regional similarities and national differences. An introduction to South America today, including Brazil and the Spanish speaking countries of the continent, through study of their cultural contexts and forms of expression.
LA ST 310 Latin America at the Movies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The representation of Latin American people, places and events in the cinemas of Latin America, North America and Europe.
LA ST 311 Latin America and the Cultures of Popular Music =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Popular music and its role in the formation of regional and national identities, with a focus on concepts such as high and low cultures, mass culture and mass media, cultural hybridity, diaspora, and creativity. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in MUSIC 311.
LA ST 313 Women in Latin America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Women as creators, consumers, transformers, and guardians of culture. Forms of female representation through stereotypes, clichés, archetypes, and mythologies.
LA ST 330 The Latino Experience Abroad =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exile, immigration, identity, language, and other questions in texts from Latin American and Caribbean communities in North America. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in SPAN 330.
LA ST 399 Topics in Latin American Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LA ST 414 Travel Writing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Through a variety of cultural and textual productions, students will explore how various Latin American and foreign travellers construct a vision of Latin America.
LA ST 415 From Modernism to Tropicalism: (Post) Modernity in Brazilian Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Brazilian cultural development from the historical modernist vanguard of 1922 to the Tropicalist movement of the 1960s.
LA ST 425 Latin American Film Genres =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Detailed study of a film genre and the representative Latin American films of such genre.
LA ST 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Law
LAW
Faculty of Law
Undergraduate Courses
LAW 399 Introduction to Environmental Law Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to the basic structure and function of the legal system. It will then focus on the way in which law is used to control environmental problems, focussing on major federal and provincial pollution licensing legislation, and the legal duties of persons working within industry. Regimes for environmental impact assessment and the use of criminal and civil enforcement mechanisms will also be included. The relationship between legal rules and non-legal industry standards and voluntary initiatives may also be explored. Note: Open to students in the Civil Engineering (Environmental Option) degree program only. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained for LAW 459.
LAW 401 Foundations to Law Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the institutions and processes of the Canadian legal system, and its underlying values and systems of thought. Also introduced are the history, structure and function of the modern system, and the role of law and the legal profession in society.
LAW 405 Legal Research and Writing Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 2-0-0). Instruction in the fundamentals of legal research tools and techniques, including the impact of modern technology. Through a variety of written assignments, students will develop their analytical, research, communication and drafting skills, as well as becoming familiar with proper citation methods. Exercises in oral communications, advocacy skills and/or a moot court presentation may also be included.
LAW 410 Contracts Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 2-0-0; 3-0-0). A discussion of the prerequisites to the creation of contractual obligation: offer and acceptance, intention and certainty, consideration, the requirements of writing and capacity. The effect of misrepresentations and terms of the contract, together with the problems of exclusion clauses and of standard form contracts. Questions of discharge from contractual obligation on the grounds of mistake, undue influence, duress, unconscionable transactions and frustration. Remedies for breach of contract.
LAW 420 Criminal Law Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 2-0-0; 3-0-0). A general introduction to the criminal law, including basic procedure, evidence, and sentencing rules, with primary emphasis on substantive criminal law. Topics include the physical and fault elements of offences, common law and statutory defences, and constitutional principles.
LAW 430 Torts Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 2-0-0; 3-0-0). The law of negligence, damages, intentional interferences with persons, property and chattels, the law of strict liability, occupiers’ liability, nuisance, defamation, the economic torts, the future of tort law.
LAW 435 Constitutional Law Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 2-0-0; 3-0-0). An introduction to the legal framework governing the exercise of power by the legislative, executive and judicial branches of the Canadian state, covering who has the power to make new laws, the power to implement laws, and the power to adjudicate disputes. The limitations imposed on these powers by the rules of federalism and by the provisions of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms are also considered. An introduction to the constitutional provisions concerning Canada’s Aboriginal peoples is also included.
LAW 440 Property Law Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, 2-0-0; 3-0-0). This course involves the study of basic principles which govern the institution of real and personal property. Included in this analysis will be the history of property law and issues of social and political context. Other topics include right incident to the ownership and possession of land, tenures and estates, concurrent ownership, dower, leases and tenancies, easements, restrictive covenants, finders law, bailment, and gifts. Other special issues may be explored.
LAW 450 Administrative Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to provide an understanding of the legal constraints courts have placed on the behavior of administrative tribunals and government departments. Topics to be discussed: What is Administrative Law? How the courts supervise the acts and decisions of administrative bodies. Pitfalls to be avoided by administrative officers: errors of fact and law; excesses of discretion; breach of natural justice. How administrative acts and decisions may be attacked by an aggrieved citizen: remedies. Appeal and review, time limits, locus standi, choice of remedy, procedure. How to avoid attacks by aggrieved citizens. The practical outcome; strength of review. Recent trends in Administrative Law in Canada.
LAW 451 Corporations Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The laws governing corporations including: pre- incorporation matters; the corporation as a legal person; the tortious, criminal, regulatory, and contractual liability of the corporation; fiduciary duties in general and in commercial relationships, especially in the context of directors and officers, corporate social responsibility; corporate management; shareholder rights; and shareholder remedies.
LAW 452 Civil Procedure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The fundamentals of the traditional litigation process (under the Rules of Court and applicable statutes) and current issues including access and reform.
LAW 453 Evidence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The principles, rules, and procedures governing the admissibility of evidence in criminal and civil trials. Topics include competence and compellability, relevance, prejudicial effect and probative value, and character, hearsay, and expert evidence.
LAW 454 Private International Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Which courts have jurisdiction when a private law dispute involves parties, property or events in more than one jurisdiction? Which jurisdiction’s law should govern a dispute with a foreign element? When will our courts enforce the judgements of foreign courts?
LAW 456 Professional Responsibility Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the organization of the legal profession in Canada and the professional conduct of lawyers as determined by law, ethical codes of conduct and service to the public interest. Specifically, the course will address civility in communication and conduct, common ethical issues in practice, the fiduciary nature of the lawyer’s work, conflicts of interest, confidentiality, lawyer professionalism, and the lawyer’s role in the administration of justice including access to the legal system.
LAW 486 Jurisprudence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of law from a theoretical rather than a doctrinal perspective. Every year, the course will consist of a number of seminar offerings whose focus will be on a broader theoretical examination of law, legal processes, and institutions. Each of these courses will allow a critical examination of law from a variety of perspectives such as; legal theory, literature, politics, economics, social and cultural development, and religion.
LAW 496 Legal History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of law and legal institutions from a historical perspective designed to explore continuity and change in common, statute, and constitutional law. Every year, the course will consist of a limited number of seminar offerings whose focus will be on the historical development of law, legal processes, and institutions.
LAW 501 Biotechnology Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of the policy challenges associated with emerging biotechnology innovations, including stem cell research, human cloning, gene patents and bio-banking. While the course will cover relevant national and international law, its emphasis will be on ethical and policy issues. Credit will not be granted if credit has been received for Biotechnology under the LAW 599 course number.
LAW 502 Construction Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to construction law, concerning issues such as tendering, contractual relationships between various parties to the construction process, construction delivery systems, standard form agreements, bonding and insurance, the impact of tort law on construction activities, builder’s lien law, occupational health and safety law, and environmental law relating to construction.
LAW 503 Employment Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of theoretical and legal issues bearing on employment outside the unionized/collective-bargaining context, including employment as a legal relationship, independent contractors, dismissal with and without just cause, damages, and the impact of key statutes. Emerging issues shall be explored, such as the protection of confidential information, the duty of good faith, discrimination, and post-employment obligations. This course complements the Labour Law course.
LAW 504 Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The scope and purpose of taxation. The taxing power; tax appeal procedures; constitutional problem. Personal jurisdiction. Property jurisdiction. Income from a business; capital gains and losses; statutory interpretation, deductions, expenses. Gift tax.
LAW 506 Public International Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the foundational principles, structure and institutions of public international law, including the nature of the international legal system, the sources of international law, and the relevance of international law to the Canadian legal system. The role of international organizations, such as the United Nations, will also be discussed.
LAW 507 Canadian Human Rights Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the practice of human rights law in Canada. The importance of anti- discrimination legislation will be discussed, as will the development, interpretation, and enforcement of the Canadian Human Rights Act and the provincial legislative schemes. Reference will also be made to the international context and to the equality provisions of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Students will also learn the practical aspects of litigating a human rights case in Canada.
LAW 508 Legislative Process and Legislative Drafting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides students with a comprehensive introduction to the drafting, passage and interpretation of legislation. The course will deal first with Assemblies consideration of legislation, parliamentary powers, parliamentary privilege, and constitutional limitations on legislatures. Second, it will introduce judicial techniques for interpreting legislation. Third, students will be taught the basics of legislative drafting and the structure of legislation with particular emphasis on Alberta practices and Canadian drafting conventions.
LAW 509 Mediation Advocacy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mediation is a problem-solving process requiring approaches differing from those used in traditional litigation. This course teaches the mediation process from the advocate’s perspective and provides an opportunity to practice the skills necessary to become an effective mediation advocate.
LAW 511 Remedies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on remedies in a commercial setting, regardless of which ‘compartment’ of law with which they are typically associated. The course will explore issues related to traditional contract remedies, contract-tort overlap, and equitable remedies. It will also consider some of the problems associated with personal injury claims including quantification issues and the role of insurance.
LAW 512 Techniques in Negotiation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth analysis of the nature, purpose, and methodology of negotiation. Mock negotiations will be undertaken by the class. Mediation and arbitration will be discussed.
LAW 514 Judgment Enforcement Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The law governing the enforcement of judgments by unsecured creditors. Will provide an in-depth analysis of the Civil Enforcement Act of Alberta. Topics include prejudgment remedies, registration and priority of writs, enforcement against personal property, enforcement against land, garnishment and distribution. Will also cover fraudulent conveyances and preferences..
LAW 516 Dispute Resolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide students with an understanding of the breadth and scope of dispute resolution alternatives with a focus on how those alternative processes are being utilized in Alberta. Students will learn various forms of dispute resolution including client interviewing, negotiation, mediation, arbitration, med-arb, the mini-trial and litigation risk analysis. Course will look at how dispute resolution fits within the adversarial system, the benefits and drawbacks of each process and how to choose the most appropriate form.
LAW 518 Intellectual Property Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the law with respect to patents, trade marks, trade secrets, copyrights and intangible property generally.
LAW 519 Insurance Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). General principles affecting insurance contracts including good faith, indemnity, subrogation, and insurable interest; particular problems arising out of the Alberta Insurance Act in relation to automobile, life and fire insurance.
LAW 520 Criminal Procedure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the entire criminal process, from the investigatory stage to the laying of charges through to appeals. The primary emphasis will be on the pre-adjudicative phase of criminal matters, particularly the authority of the police to detain, search/seize, question and arrest individuals.
LAW 522 Sentencing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to and survey of the law of sentencing. Topics include the history of punishment, the philosophical underpinnings of sentencing law, the evidentiary rules governing sentencing hearings, and the substantive principles of adult and young offender sentencing.
LAW 524 Family Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The formation and annulment of marriage; various matrimonial remedies; judicial separation; alimony; loss of consortium; divorce; ground and procedure; custody of children; financial obligations and property rights between spouses.
LAW 526 Independent Research Paper Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected students are afforded the opportunity to undertake an independent research project on an approved topic under the direct supervision of a full-time Faculty member resulting in the submission of a research paper of 8.000 to 10,000 words. In addition to advanced knowledge; the course is designed to enhance problem solving skills, legal research methodologies and techniques and legal writing and communication skills. Material submitted for assessment in another course cannot be used in an independent research project.
LAW 530 Health Care Ethics and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In this course, students will develop an understanding of health law and health care ethics, and of the relationship - and tensions - between law and ethics in the health care context. Topics covered will include allocation of health care resources, physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia, organ donation, assisted reproductive technologies, medical tourism and research involving human subjects.
LAW 531 Law and Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected topics pertinent to law and medicine with an emphasis on the practical implications of the law for the medical profession and the effect of changes in medical practice and institutions on the law. Problems will be examined with assistance from professionals working in the relevant areas and recommendations for law reform will be sought.
LAW 532 Constitutional Litigation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Will address current issues in constitutional litigation particularly those involving the Charter. The emphasis will be on both substantive knowledge of constitutional litigation issues and development of skills within that framework. Issues such as pleadings, interventions and class actions, examination of lay and expert witnesses, the use of extrinsic aids, statistical and other forms of ordinary and expert evidence, forms of remedies, form and role of written briefs, and other related matters will be addressed.
LAW 533 Advanced Problems in Constitutional Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Entails an examination of various current problems in constitutional law. Topics covered in past years include Criminal Justice and the Charter, Comparative Constitutional Law, and Federal/Provincial Law.
LAW 538 Alberta Law Review Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students enrolled in this course will be involved in all facets of the production of the Alberta Law Review, including the assessment, selection and substantive and stylistic editing of manuscripts submitted for publication. Students enrolled in this course must normally participate as a member of the Law Review for two academic years to be eligible for credit. Students may be admitted only on application.
LAW 540 Land Titles Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A detailed study of the Alberta Land Titles Act consisting of an analysis of the Common Law and Registry Systems of Conveyancing; Introduction to the Torrens System of Land Titles; The Principles of Indefeasibility; Exceptions to Indefeasibility; Boundary Problems; Caveats; Registrable Instruments; Miscellaneous Title Problems; Remedies and Limitations; Reform.
LAW 543 Basic Oil and Gas Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The origin, occurrence, and production of oil and gas; the nature of interests in oil and gas; the acquisition and disposition of interests in oil and gas; the rights and duties of parties under oil and gas leases; pooling of oil and gas interests; acquisition of surface leases and pipeline easements.
LAW 545 The Law of Fiduciary Obligation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fiduciary law regulates relationships which depend, for their efficacy, on a strict duty of loyalty. Fiduciaries have protective responsibility for the interests, both economic and non-economic, of other persons, usually “vulnerable” persons. Fiduciary law regulates diverse relationships, including relationships between joint venturers, business partners, directors and senior management and corporations, senior employees and employers, professional service providers, lawyers, doctors, accountants, therapists and their clients and patients, principals and agents, the Crown and Indigenous Peoples and parents and their children. Topics covered will include the nature of fiduciary relationships, obligations of fiduciaries, including the obligation to avoid conflict of interest and remedies for breach of fiduciary obligation. Some attention will be paid to “unexpected” fiduciary relationships and the interrelation between fiduciary law and other sources of liability.
LAW 546 Interviewing and Counselling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to assist students in developing skills in the interviewing and counselling process. The course attempts to introduce and develop models for interviewing and counselling. The principal model is one that stresses a client-centred approach.
LAW 552 Natural Resources Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The judicial, legislative, administrative and policy problems related to the regulation and management of natural resources, including problems of allocation, development, use, pollution control, and conservation.
LAW 555 Labour Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Legal problems concerning the establishment of collective bargaining; negotiation and enforcement of the collective agreement; the activities of unions and employers in industrial disputes; and the internal affairs of labour organizations.
LAW 556 Labour Arbitration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The law and practice relating to interest and rights arbitrations in Alberta. The course will be taught partly as a seminar and partly through a series of mock arbitrations in which students will act as counsel.
LAW 557 International Human Rights Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This seminar course focuses on the international legal protection of human rights (political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights). It may also consider the rights of women, children’s rights, regional human rights systems, Canadian implementation of international human rights obligations, national human rights institutions, transitional justice issues, and the interface with international humanitarian law.
LAW 559 Environmental Law and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Canadian laws and policies designed to control air, land, and water pollution, including licensing systems, the use of quasi-criminal sanctions, environmental impact assessment processes, constitutional issues, and the usefulness of the common law. Other topics may include alternative legal approaches, such as economic incentives, wildlife protection, environmental rights, parks, the public trust doctrine or environmental mediation.
LAW 561 International Criminal Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the international legal framework for the prosecution of international crimes and crimes of international concern, and the examination of the international community’s response to these crimes through the creation of international and internationalized criminal tribunals, including the International Criminal Court. Topics for further examination include immunities, amnesties, and sentencing, as well as the domestic prosecution of international crimes in Canada and other forms of Canadian cooperation.
LAW 565 International Business Transactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a survey course on the international and domestic law governing the transactional aspects of international trade/investment activities of Canadian and foreign business entities. Topics covered include contract types and drafting, international sale of goods, financing of transactions, dispute settlement by international commercial arbitration, export/import laws, human rights and MNCs, anti-bribery laws, and international investment law.
LAW 567 Pacific Rim Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will give students the opportunity to understand the Japanese, their society and their law in the context of international society. The exact contents of the course will depend on the speciality area of the visiting professor.
LAW 580 Trusts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A brief survey of the historical development of the trust. Definition and classification of trusts. Creation of express trust; the three certainties. Completely and incompletely constituted trusts. Secret, protective, discretionary and illusory trusts. Charitable trust and the rule against perpetuities. Cy-pres doctrine. Non-charitable purpose trusts. Implied or resulting trusts. Constructive trusts. Revocation, termination and variation of trusts. The appointment, retirement and removal of trustees. Duties, discretion and powers of trustees. Breach of trust.
LAW 582 Wills and Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of the Wills Act, including formalities of execution, revocation, revival, republication, types of legacies, and principles of construction. Testamentary capacity, fraud, and undue influence. Drafting of wills. Appointment of executors and administrators, their powers and duties; probate practice.
LAW 584 Bankruptcy and Insolvency Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Participants will acquire an understanding of the rules, principles and policies underlying modern bankruptcy and insolvency law. The principal focus of the course is on the federal Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. Topics include the invocation of bankruptcy, the vesting of property in the trustee in bankruptcy, the effect of bankruptcy on third parties, impugning pre-bankruptcy transactions, the scheme of distribution, and bankruptcy discharge. The course will also examine reorganizations under the federal Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act, and review the foundational features of receivership law.
LAW 587 Personal Property Security Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will provide an in-depth analysis of the law of secured transactions in personal property. The salient features of the Alberta Personal Property Security Act will be examined, including topics on the scope of the Act, security agreements, the concepts of attachment and perfection, the priority of security interests in relation to other interests, proceeds and enforcement of security interests.
LAW 588 Immigration Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth analysis of Immigration Law in Canada. Will review the Immigration Act and Regulations and look at various tribunals involved in the immigration process including the Immigration and Refugee Board and the Federal Court. Will provide a brief historical review and discuss new developments in the law and important policy areas.
LAW 590 Aboriginal Peoples and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a survey course on Aboriginal Peoples in Canadian Law. Subjects covered include issues of race and legal reasoning, legal and historical foundations of claims to Aboriginal rights, treaty rights, Métis rights, Aboriginal peoples and the Constitution, Aboriginal claims negotiation and litigation, the Indian Act, and contemporary legal and political developments including an introduction to Aboriginal government. The course is organized as a seminar in which a great deal of learning arises from discussion and class participation.
LAW 592 Advanced Criminal Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course comprises an examination of substantive criminal law particularly: offences against the person and rights of property; the jury system; juvenile justice and quasi-criminal proceedings; and, the extraordinary remedies.
LAW 593 International Environmental Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development of international law in the environmental area. Topics to be covered include: customary principles of state responsibility; multilateral environmental treaties; global atmospheric issues; toxic contamination; sustainable development; biodiversity conservation; and international trade implications. It is recommended, but not required, that students enrolled in this course take Public International Law.
LAW 596 Advanced Torts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An analysis of, and problems in, the Law of Torts.
LAW 598 Moot Court Competition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selection to the Gale Cup, Jessup Moot, Laskin Moot, Kawaskimhon Aboriginal Moot, Western Canada/Sopinka Trial Cup Trial Moot, Canadian Corporate/Securities Moot, Labour Arbitration Moot, Alberta Court of Appeal Moot, Client Counselling Competition, Clinton J. Ford Moot, or other designated moot competition team through a preliminary round competition, preparation of a memorandum, factum or memorial, training in oral advocacy or criminal trial practice through practice rounds, and participation as a representative of the law school at the moot court competition.
LAW 599 Seminars on Specialized Legal Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). These seminars will cover specialized topics of emerging importance in the law at a senior level. The particular topic covered would vary dependent on the availability of Faculty with necessary teaching competence, student interest, and the needs of the legal profession. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
LAW 601 Corporate Reorganization and Restructuring Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Corporate reorganization and restructuring law defines a process through which an insolvent corporation attempts to reach an arrangement or proposal with its creditors. Students will acquire an understanding of the fundamental rules and principles of corporate reorganization and insolvency law within the context of a legal skills-training simulation that will also develop their ability to advise clients, negotiate with other lawyers and present arguments before a judge. Prerequisite: LAW 584.
LAW 602 Family Law Practice Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to family law practice. The course will address all aspects of family files, including chambers advocacy, preparation and presentation of affidavits, special chambers briefs, JDR’s, mini-trials, Examinations for Discovery and Examinations on Affidavit, pre-trial conferences, and trials. The course will also explore the use of other professionals in family matters, including accountants, valuators and psychologists. Practice issues covered include the special challenges of interviewing, managing client expectations, reading financial statements, and handling stress in family practice. Collaborative law practice as an alternative to litigation will be introduced. Students will moot a full special Chambers application. Prerequisite: LAW 524.
LAW 603 International Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of residence and non-residence for tax purposes, the taxation of non-residents who earn income in Canada, the taxation of Canadian residents who earn income outside Canada, and the interpretation and application of Canada’s bilateral tax treaties. Prerequisite: LAW 504.
LAW 608 Advocacy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The conduct of civil litigation including: interviewing and counselling, drafting pleadings, examinations for discovery, settlement attempts, preparation for court and participation in a mock trial. Emphasis on ethics and techniques of persuasion. Prerequisites: Completion of LAW 453.
LAW 613 Corporate Securities and Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will cover methods of small business financing including equity, borrowing, government assistance; special structures such as partnerships, joint ventures, farmouts and leases. A second major part of the course will deal with sale of securities to the public, the various parties in public financing, preparation of a prospectus, continuous disclosure and stock exchange requirements; evaluation of and issues involved in takeovers. Prerequisite: LAW 451.
LAW 640 Real Estate Transactions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The law relating to purchases and sales of real property, including a review of the following: role of the realtor; statutory and other relevant considerations in a real estate transaction; obligations of vendors in relation to title and quality defects; the closing of a “typical” real estate transaction; the remedies of vendors and purchasers.
LAW 645 Statutory Interpretation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course studies the rules, techniques and approaches used by lawyers and the courts to interpret legislation. Topics include textualist, intentionalist, purposivist approaches, and the canons of statutory construction.
LAW 651 Municipal and Planning Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores the legal framework governing land use policy and regulation in Canada, with particular emphasis on Alberta. We begin with some controversial questions: When should development be regulated, and when is it best left to the market? What powers should local governments have, and what role should they play in land use planning? We proceed to study the development approval process, including the rights of neighbours to challenge undesirable development, and the institutions and processes for resolving land use disputes. We analyze a range of public and private regulatory tools (including Alberta’s land use framework, statutory plans, zoning by-laws, subdivision controls, and restrictive covenants and homeowner associations), focusing on their relative efficacy and fairness. Planning theory and economic analysis will be applied to contemporary debates over such problems as sprawl and smart growth, and affordable housing.
LAW 660 Estate Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A review of the objectives of estate planning; study of various estate planning techniques with the use of hypothetical problems; an examination of provisions found in the Income Tax Act which affect estate planning, estate tax, and gift tax. Prerequisite: LAW 504.
LAW 665 Corporate Taxation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The tax consequences of corporation financing; amalgamations, mergers, international business transactions; tax planning from a corporation and personal standpoint; and trends in taxation. Prerequisite: LAW 504.
LAW 675 Advanced Evidence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course is designed to offer an in-depth analysis of several areas of current practical value for lawyers. The course will discuss recent developments and future possibilities relating to hearsay evidence, technology and opinion evidence, children as witnesses, and privileges. The course will track developments as to Charter-connected matters of the law of evidence, relating to burden of proof, discovery and disclosure, and principles of law touching on exclusion of evidence such as the ‘discoverability’ rule. The course may also examine special evidentiary rules applicable to special tribunals and boards. Prerequisite: LAW 453.
LAW 680 Unjust Enrichment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of unjust enrichment and its place in private law, including the concepts of enrichment, corresponding deprivation, and “unjust”, methods of restitution of unjust enrichment, and defences to claims for restitution.
Graduate Courses
LAW 517 Musicians and the Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course develops skills of negotiation preparation and execution, as well as contract drafting in the interesting context of the music business. The course canvasses the major legal and business issues that arise in contract negotiations involving myriad aspects of the music business including most prominently copyright and trade-marks. Students will be expected to elaborate key issues in a position paper, participate in contract negotiations, and finally, draft a contract with respect to a major aspect of the music business, e.g., record contracts, touring, personal managers, or publishing contracts. Credit will not be granted if credit has been received for Music and the Law under the LAW 599 course number.
LAW 690 Course-Based LLM Major Research Paper Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comprises the capstone major research paper requirement for the course-based LLM, enabling course-based LLM students to conduct advanced independent research under the supervision of a full-time member of the Faculty of Law. The paper will apply and further develop graduate-level research and writing skills learned during the course-based LLM program. The topic of the paper shall be approved by the course instructor and the Associate Dean (Graduate Studies), Faculty of Law. The paper shall be approximately 40 to 60 pages (10,000 to 15,000) words in length, inclusive of footnotes or endnotes. Material that has been submitted for assessment in another course may not form part of the major research paper.
LAW 695 Research Paper Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course enables graduate students to gain advanced knowledge within a chosen field and develop graduate-level legal research and writing skills. Independent research on an approved topic will be conducted under the supervision of a full-time member of the Faculty of Law, resulting in the submission of a written research paper of approximately 32 to 40 pages (8,000 to 10,000) words in length, inclusive of footnotes or endnotes. . The research topic is subject to the prior approval of the course instructor. Material that has been submitted for assessment in another course may not form part of the independent research paper. When the student is enrolled in the thesis-based LLM, the research paper topic shall be different from the thesis topic.
LAW 696 Graduate Seminar - Practice and Theory in Legal Scholarship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is an academic methods and theory seminar for graduate students. Students will have an opportunity to think critically about developing projects based on sound research methodologies and theoretical frameworks in order to pursue original legal scholarship at an advanced level. Enrollment restricted to graduate students.
LAW 699 Graduate Seminar on Specialized Legal Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Graduate Level. These seminars will cover a specialized topic of emerging importance in the law. The particular topic covered would vary depending on the availability of faculty with necessary teaching competence, student interest, and the needs of the legal profession.
LAW 701 Topics in Criminal Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 702 Topics in Criminal Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 703 Topics in Criminal Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 704 Topics in Criminal Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 705 Topics in Private Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 706 Topics in Private Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 707 Topics in Private Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 708 Topics in Private Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 709 Topics in Constitutional Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 710 Topics in Constitutional Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 711 Topics in Constitutional Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 712 Topics in Constitutional Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 713 Topics in Public Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 715 Topics in Public Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 716 Topics in Public Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 717 Topics in Aboriginal Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 718 Topics in Aboriginal Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 719 Topics in Aboriginal Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 720 Topics in Aboriginal Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 721 Topics in Legal History 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 722 Topics in Legal History 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 723 Topics in Legal History 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 724 Topics in Legal History 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 725 Topics in Health Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 726 Topics in Health Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 727 Topics in Health Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 728 Topics in Health Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 729 Topics in Corporate and Commercial Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 730 Topics in Corporate and Commercial Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 731 Topics in Corporate and Commercial Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 732 Topics in Corporate and Commercial Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 733 Topics in Oil, Gas, and Natural Resources Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 734 Topics in Oil, Gas, and Natural Resources Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 735 Topics in Oil, Gas, and Natural Resources Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 736 Topics in Oil, Gas, and Natural Resources Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 737 Topics in International Law 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 738 Topics in International Law 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 739 Topics in International Law 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 740 Topics in International Law 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 741 Topics in Civil Litigation 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 742 Topics in Civil Litigation 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 743 Topics in Civil Litigation 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 744 Topics in Civil Litigation 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 745 Topics in Legal Theory 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 746 Topics in Legal Theory 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 747 Topics in Legal Theory 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 748 Topics in Legal Theory 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 749 Topics in Intellectual Property 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 750 Topics in Intellectual Property 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 751 Topics in Intellectual Property 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
LAW 752 Topics in Intellectual Property 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Library and Information Studies
LIS
School of Library and Information Studies Faculty of Education
Undergraduate Courses
LIS 403 Survey of Young Adult Materials =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of fiction in all media forms for upper elementary and secondary school-aged readers. Adolescents’ reading and media needs and interests, and current issues and trends will be examined. Not open to MLIS students.
LIS 404 Comic Books and Graphic Novels in School and Public Libraries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the history and contemporary reality of comic book publishing and readership in Canada, Great Britain, Japan and the United States, and issues related to perception of the format of educators, librarians, and readers. Focus on collection development, censorship concerns and challenges, gender issues in both readership and content, genres, and impact of the Internet. Not open to MLIS students.
LIS 405 Canadian Children’s Literature for Young People in Schools and Libraries Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A survey of Canadian children’s materials from books for babies to those aimed at the young adult market. Focus on contemporary works, trends in both publishing and content, and issues such as censorship, multimedia forms and the Internet.
Graduate Courses
Note: All the following courses are restricted to MLIS students and may not be offered each year. Interested students should contact the School of Library and Information Studies for scheduling information. The following courses are required for both the thesis and course-based routes of the MLIS program and are normally prerequisites to the rest of the program: LIS 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, and 506.
LIS 501 Foundations of Library and Information Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the historical, current, and potential roles of libraries and of library and information professionals in western society. Required course. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
LIS 502 Organization of Information Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the organization of information focusing on theory and principles for application in a variety of settings. Required course. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 503 Reference and Information Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to reference and information services and resources. Includes history and varieties of reference services, user populations, instruction, ethics, access issues, the reference interview, search strategies, evaluation of services, and the organization, selection, evaluation, and use of major information resources. Required course. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 504 Leadership and Management Principles for Library and Information Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to principles and practices of leadership and management in the professional lives of librarians, archivists, and other information service practitioners. Required course. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 505 Introduction to Research in Library and Information Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the fundamental concepts, approaches, and uses of research in library and information environments. Includes research design, proposal writing, identifying and defining research problems, critically evaluating and analyzing research, and applying research findings to solve practical problems in libraries and information centres. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisite: LIS 501 and 503.
LIS 507 Introduction to Knowledge Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to different concepts and theories related to knowledge management (KM). Includes knowledge and knowledge management theories and models, KM design, KM informatics, tools and technologies for managing knowledge and an overview of issues in KM. Pre or corequisites: LIS 501, 502, and 505, or consent of instructor.
LIS 510 Storytelling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The past and present forms of storytelling, including the oral tradition, the function of the storyteller, the selection of material and the techniques of telling stories and listening to stories. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 515 Materials for Young Adults Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Materials for young adults of junior and senior high school age, young adults’ reading interests, and current trends and issues in young adults literature. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 516 Canadian Children’s Literature for Young People in Schools and Libraries Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A survey of Canadian children’s materials from books for babies to those aimed at the young adult market. Focus on contemporary works, trends in both publishing and content, and issues such as censorship, multimedia forms and the Internet. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 518 Comic Books and Graphic Novels in Schools and Public Libraries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the history and contemporary reality of comic book publishing and readership in Canada, Great Britain, Japan and the United States, and issues related to perception of the format by educators, librarians, and readers. Focus on collection development, censorship concerns and challenges, gender issues in both readership and content, genres, and impact of the Internet. Open to MLIS students and other graduate students. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 519 Introduction to Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature for children from infancy through the elementary school years, principles of evaluation and selection, and current issues and trends. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 520 Information Resources in Specialized Fields Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Information resources and their administration in a specialized field and for a specialized clientele. The emphasis is on the nature of the field, problems of collection development, bibliographic access, retrieval and use by the clientele, and administrative issues in solving these problems. Specialized fields regularly examined are law, business, and health sciences. Prerequisites are variable, contact department for more information.
LIS 526 Instructional Practices in Library and Information Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice related to the teaching roles of the librarian or information professional. Includes planning, implementation and evaluation of pedagogical approaches for the design of effective information literacy and professional development instructional sessions. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prequisites: LIS 501, 502, and 503, or consent of instructor.
LIS 531 Collection Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An analytical approach to collection management including the acquisition, review and evaluation of collections. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, 503, 504, and 505, or consent of instructor.
LIS 532 Metadata Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to the concept, development, applications and evaluation of metadata in various information contexts. Through a combination of practical exercises, including classification, cataloguing, and RDA, students will critically examine metadata issues, standards, and best practices, and will evaluate the role of metadata in discovery and access systems.
LIS 533 Database Design for Information Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to core concepts, principles, and techniques of database design for information management, from user requirement analysis, to data and information modeling and querying. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 534 Information Architecture: Web Design for Usability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the principles and practice of web usability, with a focus on information architecture, layout and design, metadata, and other topics related to effective web design and management. Includes an introduction to HTML and other web coding. Pre or corequisites: LIS 501 and 502, or consent of instructor.
LIS 535 Advanced Topics in the Organization of Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the principles and practice of indexing, abstracting, thesaurus construction, metadata, or other topics relevant to the organization of knowledge. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, 503, and 505, or consent of instructor.
LIS 536 Digital Reference and Information Retrieval Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the integration of digital services into the array of reference services, with an emphasis on information retrieval systems and their effective use by professionals and end users. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, and 503, or consent of instructor.
LIS 538 Digital Libraries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the concept, development, types and trends of digital libraries. This course will focus on the creation, organization, access, use and evaluation of digital libraries with a view to socioeconomic and cultural issues. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, 503, and 505, or consent of instructor.
LIS 541 Library and Information Services in Culturally Diverse Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the central concepts of diversity and inclusion and a range of related issues and contributions with respect to specific populations and traditionally underrepresented groups, and their support systems, in library and information settings. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
LIS 542 Library Preservation, Security, and Risk Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to and overview of the role and activities of preservation administration in libraries of all kinds, from the physical preservation and conservation of book and multimedia collections, to risk management and insurance, prevention of theft and vandalism, disaster contingency planning and preparedness, through post-disaster salvage and recovery operations. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 545 Management of Human Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The field of human resource management and its application in library and information services. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, and 504, or consent of instructor.
LIS 546 Marketing Library and Information Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The principles of marketing and public relations for nonprofit organizations, with an emphasis on library and information services. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, and 503, or consent of instructor.
LIS 548 Library Services to Children and Young Adults Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The principles and practices of library service to children and young adults. Prerequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 580 Contemporary Theories and Practices of Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of different theories of reading (e.g. social, psychological, literary) and of sites and practices of literacy in an era of rapid cultural and technological change. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 585 Multimedia Literacies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theories, practices and implications of multimedia literacies. Examples of multimedia texts include print, video, audio, CD-ROM, DVD, computer programs, digital games, hypermedia, Internet sites, graphic forms, electronic books, and text-based toys, games, and commodities. The course will explore the cultural, social, commercial, and educational issues raised by the proliferation of such texts. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 586 History of the Book Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The historical, aesthetic, and economic bases of the ‘book’ and its role in the recording and preservation of information and ideas. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 587 Facilities Planning for Libraries and Information Centres Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The examination of the building needs of various types of libraries and information centres, the involvement of information professionals and architects in the planning process, and various contemporary building styles. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 590 Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 100 hours). The application of LIS theories and principles through experiential learning in a library, archives, records management and other services settings. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites: LIS 501, 502, 504, 505, and an additional *6 in LIS electives, or consent of instructor.
LIS 591 Publishing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of trends and issues in publishing, particularly the impacts of media and digital technology, and of the critical intersections among the publishing industry, contemporary society, and the library and information professions. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 592 Intellectual Freedom and Social Responsibility in Librarianship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the central concepts of intellectual freedom and social responsibility and the range of related issues impacting librarians, library institutions, and library associations. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 593 Archives Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theories, standards and methods used in management of modern archives, with an historical overview and an emphasis on contemporary theory and practice. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 594 Records Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory and techniques of records management. Pre or corequisite: LIS 501 or consent of instructor.
LIS 596 Seminar Œ1-2 (variable) (either term, variable). A current topic of significance to, or a special aspect of, library and information studies may be examined as demand and resources permit. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites are variable, contact department for more information.
LIS 597 Advanced Scholarship and Research in LIS Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). In-depth exploration of systematic approaches to scholarship and research in library and information studies for students pursuing thesis-route master’s programs or other advanced projects. Prerequisites: LIS 501 and 505, or consent of the instructor.
LIS 598 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A current topic of significance to, or a special aspect of, library and information studies may be examined as demand and resources permit. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites are variable, contact department for more information.
LIS 599 Directed Study Œ1-3 (variable) (either term, variable). Further study of special topics and issues, based on knowledge acquired in previous courses or on significant prior experience. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Topic and course weight to be approved by the School. Prerequisite: consent of department.
LIS 600 Capping Exercise Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 12 hours). The required capping exercise for the MLIS degree is an ePortfolio representing examples of the student’s course work, leadership and innovation potential, communication skills, and involvement in professional life. Normally students are expected to begin developing their ePortfolio during their second semester. The ePortfolio must be completed and submitted during their final term of coursework. It will demonstrate that the student has met the Program Level Learning Outcomes (PLLOs) of the MLIS degree.
LIS 697 Advanced Scholarship and Research in LIS Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). In-depth exploration of systematic approaches to scholarship and research in library and information studies for students pursuing doctoral programs or other advanced projects. Permission of the instructor is required.
LIS 699 Directed Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Further study at the doctoral level of special topics and issues, based on knowledge acquired in previous courses or on significant prior experience. Topics must be approved by the School.
#
Linguistics
LING
Department of Linguistics Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
LING 101 Introduction to Linguistic Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Central concepts of linguistics: linguistic categories and structure (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics). Note: May not be taken by students with credit in LING 111.
LING 102 Introduction to Linguistics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to cross-disciplinary and applied areas in linguistics (e.g. language change, language acquisition, language in society). Pre- or corequisite: LING 101. Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 100.
LING 111 Intro to Linguistic Analysis for Language Revitalization Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Central concepts of linguistics: linguistic categories and structure (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics) with special attention to Canadian Indigenous languages. Restricted to CILLDI program students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 101.
LING 204 English Syntax =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Linguistic analysis of the syntax of modern English. Prerequisite: LING 101.
LING 205 Phonetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Recognizing, transcribing, and producing speech sounds using the International Phonetic Alphabet; problems in phonetic analysis; elementary acoustic phonetics; techniques for describing the sound system of an unfamiliar language. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: LING 101.
LING 211 Phonetics of Indigenous Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Recognizing, transcribing, and producing speech sounds using the International Phonetic Alphabet; problems in phonetic analysis; elementary acoustic phonetics; techniques for describing the sound system of Canadian Indigenous languages. Prerequisite: LING 101 or 111. Restricted to CILLDI program students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 205.
LING 212 Morphosyntax of Indigenous Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Morphological structure and meaning in Canadian Indigenous languages, including how best to represent lexical meaning and form in a dictionary, how new words might be coined, and how these languages with their complex morphology and verb systems might be taught to adult learners. Prerequisite: LING 101 or LING 111. Restricted to CILLDI program students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 308 or 309.
LING 213 Sentence and Discourse Patterns of Indigenous Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Types of sentence and discourse patterns in Canadian Indigenous languages; attention to real language use across different genres (e.g. traditional stories, conversation, personal narratives, oratory and ceremony) so that CLC students can go on to collect and transcribe samples of language in context rather than word lists or sentences in isolation. Prerequisite: LING 101 or LING 111. Restricted to CILLDI program students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in LING 308 or 309.
LING 308 Morphology and the Lexicon Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles of word formation and structure across languages: the organization of the lexicon and representation of words. Prerequisites: LING 101, 204 and 205.
LING 309 Syntax and Semantics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles in syntax (constituent structure, sentence relatedness, grammatical relations) and semantics (word meaning, semantic roles, event structure). Prerequisites: LING 101 and 204.
LING 310 Introductory Phonology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles of phonological analysis across languages: the organization of the lexicon and representation of words. Prerequisites: LING 101 and 205.
LING 311 Special Topics in Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). A study of recent developments in particular subareas of linguistics with special attention to the Indigenous languages of Western Canada. Prerequisite: LING 111 or consent of Department. Restricted to CILLDI program students.
LING 314 Discourse Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of selected approaches to the study of discourse including conversational analysis, narrative structure, text analysis. Prerequisite: LING 101. Not offered every year.
LING 316 Sociolinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of phonological, syntactic, lexical, and semantic variation in language systems in connection with extra-linguistic factors such as individual, social, or demographic differences. Prerequisite: LING 101. Not offered every year.
LING 319 Child Language Acquisition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic issues in first language acquisition: theories, research methods, and major findings. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: LING 101, LING 204 and 205 recommended. Not open to students with credit in CSD 211.
LING 320 Second Language Acquisition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application of linguistics to theoretical issues in second-language acquisition: properties of language, problems of languages in contact, psycholinguistic aspects of bilingualism. Prerequisite: LING 101. Recommended: LING 204.
LING 321 Neurolinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A neurolinguistic approach to the representation and processing of linguistic structures in the brain; patterns of language breakdown resulting from damage to the brain. Prerequisites: LING 101 and 204, or consent of Department. Not offered every year.
LING 323 Linguistics and the Mind Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of language and linguistics in the understanding of human information processing and the nature of mental representations. Prerequisite: LING 101.
LING 324 Endangered Languages Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of languages facing extinction: how language endangerment arises, local and global factors affecting loss, how linguistic and cultural diversity suffers, and how linguists can respond. Prerequisite: LING 101.
LING 325 Writing Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History and typology of writing systems and how different writing systems influence the reading process. Prerequisite: LING 101.
LING 375 Linguistics Directed Research I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Independent study of a particular sub-area of linguistics. Normally offered as a reading course and directed research practicum through special prior arrangement. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
LING 399 Special Topics in Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of recent developments in particular sub- areas of linguistics. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Normally offered only as a reading course through special arrangement.
LING 400 Psycholinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues and methods involved in the experimental study of language production, comprehension, and acquisition. Prerequisites: Any two of LING 308, 309 or 310. Recommended: a course in elementary statistics.
LING 401 Semantics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of natural language semantics across languages at both the lexical and clause levels. Topics covered include sense, reference, features, compositionality, semantic roles, logical form, categorization, and conceptualization. Prerequisite: LING 309. Not offered every year.
LING 405 Historical Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles and methods in the study of language change. Prerequisite: LING 310. Not offered every year.
LING 407 Linguistic Typology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of similarities, differences, tendencies, and universals in the phonological, morphological, and syntactic patterns of different languages. Prerequisite: LING 309. Not offered every year.
LING 419 Linguistics and Child Language Disorders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Linguistic characteristics of language disorders across special populations of children. Theoretical issues in linguistic approaches to developmental language disorders. Prerequisite: LING 319; 309 recommended.
LING 420 Phonological Acquisition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of data, theories and methodologies in the study of phonological development, including L1 and L2 production and perception. Prerequisite: LING 310.
LING 455 Speech Perception Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the historical development and current issues in the investigation of speech perception. Prerequisite: LING 205 or PSYCO 357. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 455, or PSYCO 405 Topic: Speech Perception.
LING 475 Linguistics Directed Research II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced study of a particular sub-area of linguistics. Normally offered as a reading course and directed research practicum through special prior arrangement. Prerequisite: LING 375 and Consent of Instructor.
LING 499 Special Topics in Linguistic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A course designed to explore recent developments in particular areas of linguistic theory. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Normally offered only as a reading course through special arrangement.
LING 500 Psycholinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues and methods involved in the experimental study of language production, comprehension, and acquisition. Prerequisite: LING 400 or consent of the department. Recommended: A course in elementary statistics.
LING 501 Research Project Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Requires a literature review, devising research methodology, writing and defending a project proposal. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Required for BA Honors students in Linguistics in their final year. Restricted to BA Honors and graduate students in Linguistics.
LING 502 Honors Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Directed Honors thesis. Prerequisites: LING 501 and consent of Department. Note: Required for and Restricted to BA Honors students in Linguistics in their final year.
LING 509 Syntactic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced syntactic analysis and related theoretical issues. Prerequisite: LING 309 or consent of Department.
LING 510 Current Phonological Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current approaches to phonological theory, focusing on constraint-based analysis. Prerequisite: LING 310 or consent of Department.
LING 512 Acoustic Phonetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of the articulatory, perceptual, and acoustic aspects of speech signal; measuring the acoustic aspects of speech. Prerequisite: LING 310 or 312 (formerly LING 412).
LING 513 Speech Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to speech synthesis and speech recognition, with some time allotted to other speech and language technologies. The purpose of this course is to give students background that would be useful for work in the speech technology industry. Prerequisite: LING 205 or consent of Department.
LING 515 Field Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical experience in linguistic data collection and analysis of the sound and form systems of an unfamiliar language. Prerequisites: LING 205, 309 (formerly 209), and 310 (formerly 210) or consent of Department. Not offered every year.
LING 516 Languages in Contact Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variation in language and language usage in bilingual and cross-linguistic situations. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
LING 519 Corpus Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and practical issues relating to using corpora in linguistic analysis: principles of corpus construction, application of corpus techniques to problems in linguistics, frequency counts, collocational searches, creating databases out of search results. Prerequisites: LING 309 and 310 or consent of department.
LING 520 Computational Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and implementation aspects of: computational morphology and phonology, part-of-speech tagging, parsing, grammar engineering, lexical semantics, and corpus analysis. Prerequisites: LING 308, 209 and 310; or Consent of Department.
LING 599 Special Topics in Linguistic Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of recent developments in particular areas of linguistic research. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Formerly LING 443.
Graduate Courses
LING 523 Introduction Statistics for Linguistic Data Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic statistical concepts, analysis methods and visualization techniques focusing on linguistic data. Prerequisite: any one of LING 308, LING 309, LING 310 or equivalent, or consent of Department.
LING 555 Speech Perception Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the historical development and current issues in the investigation of speech perception.
LING 601 Phonology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current approaches to phonological theory, focusing on constraint-based analysis-advanced level. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
LING 602 Seminar in Syntax Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Critical examination of selected theoretical issues in morphosyntax. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
LING 603 Quantitative Methods in Linguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Multivariate statistical methods as applied to linguistic data, and other statistical techniques of interest to linguists. Prerequisite: LING 523 or consent of the Department.
LING 604 Seminar in Psycholinguistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A review of the current theories and research in psycholinguistics. Prerequisite: LING 500.
LING 605 Seminar in Experimental Phonetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A survey of the present state of knowledge in speech production and perception. Prerequisite: LING 512 (LING 412 prior to 1997-98). Note: offered in alternate years.
LING 608 Morphology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current approaches to morphological theory and analysis and their implications for grammatical theory and models of the lexicon. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: offered in alternate years.
LING 610 Formal Grammatical Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In-depth examination of a current grammatical theory. Prerequisite: LING 602 or consent of Department. Note: offered in alternate years.
LING 611 Phonology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current examination of selected theoretical topics in phonology, focusing on issues of representation. Prerequisite: LING 601 or consent of Department. Note: offered in alternate years.
LING 614 Methods in Experimental Phonetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Training in experimental phonetics research methods with emphasis on practical experience. Prerequisite: LING 512 and graduate level Statistics course.
LING 620 Second Language Acquisition and Bilingualism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Major theories and issues in second language acquisition and bilingualism research. (Course is cross-listed with MLCS 620). Credit will only be granted for one of LING 620 or MLCS 620. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
LING 683 Conference Course I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0).
LING 684 Conference Course II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0).
LING 693 Generals Paper I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
LING 694 Generals Paper II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
LING 903 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *3 for registration status and fee assessment purposes. Not available for Degree Credit.
LING 906 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *6 for registration status and fee assessment purposes. Not available for Degree Credit.
LING 909 Directed Research Project Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *9 for registration status and fee assessment purposes. Not available for Degree Credit.
LING 911 Masters Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
#
Maintaining Registration
M REG
University of Alberta
Graduate Courses
M REG 800 Maintaining Registration Œ0 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Maintaining registration in a graduate program and status as a graduate student. Graduate students who do not plan to register either in courses or in Theses or a project course but who wish to maintain their position in a program and their status as graduate students can register in M REG.
M REG 900 Maintaining Registration Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Open only to graduate students who have received an approved leave of absence and who wish to access certain student services while on leave. Not open to online registration.
#
Management Information Systems
MIS
Department of Accounting, Operations and Information Systems Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all MIS courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
MIS 311 Management Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Introduction to all major areas of information systems. Technology and file systems, organizational and behavioral issues, datamodeling, databases, expert systems, systems analysis, systems development life cycle, etc. Development of analytical skills which can be brought to bear on MIS problems. Notes: Students are expected to have basic familiarity with microcomputer applications (word processing, spreadsheets, personal data base, presentation graphics, personal information manager, email, web browser). The lab component will be taught for up to 10 weeks.
MIS 412 Managerial Support Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an understanding of the interaction between decision-making and technology within organizational contexts. Within the context of decision support systems (DSS), focus is on four key components: 1) the technology; 2) the broader context, including the decision- making styles which exist at the organizational, group and individual levels; 3) the design and development of DSS; 4) the effectiveness of DSS to support decision-making processes, including issues of implementation and evaluation. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 413 Systems Analysis and Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the critical stages of the systems development process. These include the initiation, planning, analysis, design, implementation and maintenance of information systems needed to support business functions in organizations. The concepts of life cycle, requirements definition, analysis and design methods, and computer-assisted software engineering (CASE) tools are presented. Specific modeling techniques such as process models, data models and logic models are examined in detail. Hands-on experience with a high-end CASE tool are provided. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 415 Data Base Design and Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Application of database concepts in organizations. A comprehensive introduction to the design and development of relational databases from a logical data model. The relational database access language SQL is used along with a number of key-software development tools. Effective data administration techniques for enforcing integrity and security as well as enhancing performance are discussed. Topics of special current interest include data warehousing and the object-oriented data model. Prerequisite: MIS 311. Note: There will be a lab component for up to ten weeks during the term.
MIS 417 Telecommunications in Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to fundamental concepts required to understand and apply telecommunication technologies within a business environment. Emphasizes the principles of those technologies to familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts and terminology of telecommunications. Telecommunications equipment, networks, protocols and architectures are introduced and discussed regarding their relevance and impact on business-oriented organizations. Also introduces managerial aspects such as planning, design and performance of telecommunication systems. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 418 Electronic Commerce Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the development of electronic commerce in business across a number of different sectors. Using a process modelling approach, traditional vs. electronic business transactions are discussed in business-to-business and business-to-consumer modes; strategies for e-commerce are developed with a focus on the appropriate technical architecture to support business in an electronic marketplace. In particular, requirements of payment systems, and issues of security and privacy are discussed as key considerations in implementation. The course uses software development tools in the implementation of these electronic commerce strategies. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 419 Systems Development Using Advanced Software Tools Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Covers the physical design and implementation of computer systems with modern software development tools. Is a continuation of the systems analysis and design topics introduced in MIS 413 and uses the outcomes of the logical systems analysis and design process to create the actual system. Prerequisite: MIS 413. Corequisites: MIS 415 and CMPUT 175, or consent of Department. Note: There will be a lab component for up to 12 weeks during the term. Credit may not be obtained for both MIS 419 and CMPUT 301 or 401.
MIS 424 Introduction to Information Systems Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines information system development project management. The system development project is a multi-stage activity involving investigation and analysis, scope definition, resource analysis and estimation, timing estimation, cost estimation, scheduling, monitoring, and implementation. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 426 Technology-Enabled Business Process Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the major operational activities and tasks that have come to be called business processes. Will identify and categorize key business processes, demonstrate process mapping as a method of business process analysis, and demonstrate process redesign principles as a way to better manage these processes. Will feature the role of IT in process redesign. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 427 Information System Security Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on Information System Security from a Managerial point of view. It examines the IT security needs of all business areas. The course covers aspects of threat assessment, policy creation and enforcement, implementation and the hurdles involved, auditing, and forensics. It also looks at the different ways that compromises can occur and how to detect and prevent them from a planning and Disaster Recovery level. A great many real world examples are used as well as exposing the student to current technology that is used in industry. The main focus is from a manager’s point of view and teaches planning skills that are important in a field that grows on a daily basis. Prerequisite: MIS 311.
MIS 437 Accounting Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the field of computerized accounting information systems in organizations from the perspective of the information system professional. Accounting information systems are typically the foundation for many other information systems in organizations. Concentrates on the design of accounting information systems in organizations and integration of accounting information systems with other functional area and management information systems as well as commonalities in the system development process for accounting and other functional area information systems. Prerequisites: ACCTG 311, 322, MIS 311. Credit may be granted for only one of ACCTG 437 or MIS 437.
MIS 441 Managing Information Systems: A Senior Management Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intended as a capstone course to the MIS Major. Issues, opportunities, and problems involved in the management of information system resources in organizations. These include human resource, financial, policies, standards, and strategic alignment concerns relating to the information systems department. The role of the CIO (Chief Information Officer) will be explored as the focal point for the course. Integrative cases of information systems issues in small, medium and large organizations will be discussed. Prerequisites: MIS 311 and a minimum of one 400-level MIS course, or consent of Department. Open only to fourth year students. Credit will be granted for only one of MIS 414 or 441.
MIS 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
MIS 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MIS 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
MIS 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MIS 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
MIS 611 Seminar in Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Introduction to all major areas of information systems. Technology and file systems, organizational and behavioral issues, data modeling, databases, expert systems, systems analysis, systems development life cycle, etc. Development of analytical skills which can be brought to bear on MIS problems. Notes: Students are expected to have basic familiarity with microcomputer applications. There will be a lab component during the term.
MIS 612 Managerial Support Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an understanding of the interaction between decision-making and technology within organizational contexts. Within the context of decision support systems (DSS), focus is on four key components: 1) the technology; 2) the broader context, including the decision- making styles which exist at the organizational, group and individual levels; 3) the design and development of DSS; 4) the effectiveness of DSS to support decision- making processes, including issues of implementation and evaluation.
MIS 613 Systems Analysis and Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the critical stages of the systems development process. These include the initiation, planning, analysis, design, implementation and maintenance of information systems needed to support business functions in organizations. The concepts of life cycle, requirements of definition, analysis and design methods, and computer assisted software engineering (CASE) tools are presented. Specific modeling techniques such as process models, data models and logic models are examined in detail. Hands-on experience with a high-end CASE tool is provided.
MIS 615 Data Base Design and Administration Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Application of database concepts in organizations. A comprehensive introduction to the design and development of relational databases from a logical data model. The relational database access language SQL is used along with a number of key software development tools. Effective data administration techniques for enforcing integrity and security as well as enhancing performance are also discussed. Topics of special current interest include data warehousing and the object-oriented data model. Note: The lab component will be taught for ten weeks during the term.
MIS 618 Electronic Commerce Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the development of electronic commerce in business across a number of different sectors. Using a process modelling approach, traditional vs. electronic business transactions are discussed in business-to-business and business-to-consumer modes; strategies for e-commerce are developed with a focus on the appropriate technical architecture to support business in an electronic marketplace. In particular, requirements of payment systems, and issues of security and privacy are discussed as key considerations in implementation. The course uses software development tools in the implementation of these electronic commerce strategies.
MIS 624 IT/IS Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines information system development project management. The system development project is a multi-stage activity involving investigation and analysis, scope definition, resource analysis and estimation, timing estimation, cost estimation, scheduling, monitoring, and implementation.
MIS 641 Information Systems Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues, opportunities, and problems involved in the management of information system resources in organizations. These include human resource, financial, policies, standards, and strategic alignment concerns relating to the information systems department. The role of the CIO (Chief Information Officer) will be explored as the focal point for the course. Integrative cases of information systems issues in small, medium and large organizations will be discussed.
MIS 686 Selected Topics in Management Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
MIS 701 Introduction to Management Information Systems Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a general introduction to the major research fields of management information systems (MIS). As an introductory seminar, coverage will include current and historical topics appearing in top information systems journals. Discussions will revolve around the reference disciplines and theories used in the MIS literature. Corequisite: MGTSC 705. Prerequisite: A graduate or undergraduate course in management information systems or equivalent. Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MIS 702 Advanced Research Topics in Management Information Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an in-depth introduction to a particular methodology or a particular setting that is relevant to research in management information systems. The topic may vary from year to year. Possible topics include applications of optimal control theory in management information systems and operations management, collaborative communication systems, and quantitative models for management information systems. The required background for students will vary depending on the topic. This course may be appropriate for some graduate students in engineering or computing science. Prerequisite: Written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MIS 710 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Management Science
MGTSC
Department of Finance and Statistical Analysis Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all MGTSC courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
MGTSC 312 Probability and Statistics for Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). This course deals with model building, multiple regression analysis, and related methods useful in a business environment. Microcomputer software will be utilized throughout the course, with necessary computing skills being taught as the course proceeds. However, students are expected to already possess some basic familiarity with microcomputer applications. Prerequisite: STAT 151 or SCI 151. Credit will be granted for only one of MGTSC 312 and STAT 252.
MGTSC 405 Forecasting for Planners and Managers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with methods used to predict the uncertain nature of business trends in an effort to help managers make better decisions and plans. Such efforts often involve the study of historical data and manipulation of these data to search for patterns that can be effectively extrapolated to produce forecasts. This is a business statistics course that covers all aspects of business forecasting where the emphasis is on intuitive concepts and applications. Topics covered include the family of exponential smoothing methods, decomposition methods, dynamic regression methods, Box-Jenkins methods and judgmental forecasting methods (e.g. the Delphi method). Because forecasting is best taught through practice, the course contains numerous real, relevant, business oriented case studies and examples that students can use to practice the application of concepts. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312, MGTSC 352 or OM 352.
MGTSC 455 Quality Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of the course is to study and understand process and product variation, interactions among product and process variables, and ultimately to take action to reduce variation. The topics covered include statistical process control, design of experiment, factorial design, Taguchi’s methods and cases, and applications of quality control in management. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312, ECON 101 or equivalents.
MGTSC 458 Assessing National Economies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers the statistics now commonly used by businesses, governments, labour and other collective bargaining units, social action groups, legal professionals, and the media to assess the performance of nations over time and in comparison with each other. This course helps students improve their skills for finding, obtaining, and using relevant raw data and statistics for assessing nations. Students also find, read and use studies of others that make use of data and statistics to assess the performance of nations. Prerequisite: MGTSC 312. Pre or corequisite: ECON 101.
MGTSC 488 Selected Topics in Management Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth- year Business students. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
MGTSC 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
MGTSC 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MGTSC 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
MGTSC 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MGTSC 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
MGTSC 501 Data Analysis and Decision Making Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). This course begins with a survey of graphical and numerical techniques available for studying and describing data. Following an introduction to probability distributions, an overview of statistical inference for means and proportions is provided. Regression, analysis of variance and decision analysis are then utilized to analyze data and support decision making. Time series models are also briefly discussed. The data and decisions analyzed throughout the course will be representative of those commonly encountered by managers. During the required lab sessions, spreadsheet analysis of data, Monte Carlo simulation and the use of software for statistical analysis will be presented. Not open to students who have completed MGTSC 511 and MGTSC 521.
MGTSC 655 Quality Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of the course is to study and understand process and product variation, interactions among product and process variables and ultimately to take action to reduce variation. The topics covered include statistical process control, design of experiment, factorial design, Taguchi’s methods and cases and applications of quality control in management. Prerequisite: MGTSC 501 or 521.
MGTSC 686 Selected Topics in Management Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
MGTSC 705 Multivariate Data Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of multivariate data analysis normally taken by students in the first year of the Business PhD program. Designed to bring students to the point where they are comfortable with commonly used data analysis techniques available in most statistical software packages. Students are expected to complete exercises in data analysis and in solving proofs of the major results. Topics will include univariate analysis, bivariate analysis, multiple linear regression, and analysis of variance. It is expected that students have as background at least one semester of calculus, one semester of linear algebra, and two semesters introduction to probability, probability distributions and statistical inference. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MGTSC 706 Multivariate Data Analysis II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A continuation of the overview of multivariate data analysis begun in MGTSC 705. Topics include categorical data analysis, multivariate linear regression, discriminant analysis, canonical correlation, multivariate analysis of variance, principal component analysis, factor analysis, cluster analysis and logistic regression. Prerequisite: MGTSC 705 or consent of Instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MGTSC 707 Applied Business Analysis of Time Series and Panel Data Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is organized into two parts. Part I covers univariate and multivariate time domain models of stationary and nonstationary time series. Topics covered include univariate time series models, unit root tests, time series regression modeling, systems of regression equations, vector autoregressive models for multivariate time series and cointegration. In Part II the course introduces the issues and opportunities that arise with panel data and the main statistical techniques used for its analysis. Topics covered include fixed-effects models, random-effects models, dynamic models and limited dependent variable models. Throughout the course, the emphasis will be on how to use S-plus and Stata to estimate panel data and time series models. There is relatively less emphasis on statistical theory. Evaluation in the course is based on home work assignments and a term project. Prerequisite: MGTSC 705 or equivalent.
MGTSC 820 Data Analysis and Modeling Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Developing the ability to collect information and to use information technology to analyze statistically and draw conclusions; developing computer skills and understanding research methods. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
#
Marine Science (Biological Sciences)
MA SC
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) Courses are offered at Bamfield Marine Science Centre. Details are available from the Department of Biological Sciences.
(2) Prerequisite for all of the following courses is consent of the Department of Biological Sciences.
(3) Students will be expected to take a full course load of *15 during the Fall term.
(4) Students must also refer to the Faculty of Science, Marine Science section of the calendar for information.
Undergraduate Courses
MA SC 401 Special Topics in Marine Biology =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Offered, as opportunities arise, by selected scientists who are working at the Bamfield Marine Science Centre. The course will generally be of a specialized nature and be at a level appropriate to graduate or senior undergraduate students. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MA SC 402 Special Topics in Marine Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Offered, as opportunities arise, by selected scientists who are working at the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre and are prepared to offer a course extending over a three-week period. Course will be of a specialized nature. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MA SC 403 Directed Studies in Marine Science =OPEN Œ3-6 (variable) (first term, 13 weeks). Study will involve a research project approved by a supervisor in the student’s field of interest, and will be designed to take maximum advantage of the laboratory and/or field opportunities. Students may arrange for a supervisor before the start of the fall semester. Advanced students may, with the permission of their university, take a *6 directed study in lieu of MA SC 415, 425, or 437.
MA SC 410 Marine Invertebrate Zoology =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). A survey of the marine phyla, with emphasis on the benthic fauna in the vicinity of the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre. The course includes lectures, laboratory exercises, field collection, identification, and observation. Emphasis is placed on the study of living specimens in the laboratory and in the field.
MA SC 412 Biology of Fishes =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Classification, physiology, ecology, behavior and zoogeography of fishes with particular emphasis on those in the marine environment of the British Columbia coast. Course will involve some field projects.
MA SC 415 Structure and Function in Animals =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4 weeks). This course examines the form and function of invertebrates and vertebrates using a comparative approach. The subject areas include morphology and evolution, systems physiology, biomechanics, and development. The local marine and coastal fauna are used to illustrate the principles. The course includes fieldwork and a series of laboratory exercises and experiments.
MA SC 425 Ecological Adaptations of Seaweeds =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4 weeks). The course explores morphological, physiological, genetic and reproductive adaptations of seaweeds to their natural and human altered environments.
MA SC 430 Marine Ecology =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). An analytical approach to biotic associations in the marine environment. Opportunities will be provided for study of the intertidal realm in exposed and protected areas and of beaches and estuaries in the vicinity of the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
MA SC 437 Marine Population Ecology and Dynamics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4 weeks). An analytical approach to the study of marine ecology and marine populations. Intertidal and subtidal communities will be examined, with emphasis on the biota of the Barkley Sound region.
MA SC 480 Seminars and Papers in Marine Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 13 weeks). A series of weekly discussion groups and seminars covering current topics of interest in the marine sciences. Seminars will be presented by BMSC researchers, graduate students, visiting scientists as well as by the students themselves.
Graduate Courses
MA SC 502 Graduate Level Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Courses offered as opportunities arise, by distinguished scientists who are visiting at Bamfield Marine Station and are prepared to offer a course extending over a three-week period. The course will carry graduate credit.
#
Marketing
MARK
Departments of Marketing, Business Economics, and Law Faculty of Business
Note: Enrolment in all MARK courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Business, or to students registered in specified programs that require Business courses to meet degree requirements and who have obtained prior approval of their Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
MARK 301 Introduction to Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students are introduced to the marketing concept and the role of marketing within the overall business framework. The basic tools of marketing are introduced: market segmentation, positioning, product, price, distribution, and promotion, together with marketing research, consumer behavior, planning, and global marketing. A critical theme of the course is the need for the marketing mix to fit with the requirements of consumers, the competitive environment, company strengths, and community expectations. These issues are considered from strategic and tactical perspectives. Prerequisites: ECON 101 and 102, MATH 113 or equivalent.
MARK 312 Marketing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nature and significance of marketing research. Marketing research methods, investigation and analysis of specific research problems. Prerequisite: MARK 301. Not open to students with credit in MARK 412.
MARK 320 Consumer Behavior Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of the factors affecting the consumer decision process. Analysis of consumer behavior models and their application to marketing decision making, with an emphasis on empirical research. Prerequisite: MARK 301. BCom degree credit will not be granted for both MARK 320 and HECOL 320. Not open to students with credit in MARK 422 or CONS 220.
MARK 432 Marketing Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students study basic concepts of interpersonal and mass communications. An emphasis on integrated marketing communications (IMC) which consist of advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, direct marketing, and public relations. A focus on integrating the elements which make up an IMC plan, resulting in a coherent communications strategy. Consumer motivation and the measurement of communication effectiveness are also examined. Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 442 Seminar in International Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of problems of international marketing; development of marketing strategies in light of world cultural, economic, geographic, legal and political factors. Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 452 Strategic Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of this course is to provide students with the analytic, planning, and communication skills to be successful marketing managers. The focus is on practical marketing planning, along with the development and implementation of marketing strategies. Course activities may include the use of marketing simulation games, case analyses, field research projects, secondary research and in-depth discussion of current literatures. The course focuses on the integration of all the conceptual areas in marketing. Prerequisite: MARK 301. Restricted to third year students who have completed MARK 312 or MARK 320, or to fourth year students.
MARK 455 Sustainability and Responsible Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Marketing plays a large role in and is affected by corporate social responsibility (CSR) and sustainability issues. This course will explore, examine and inform how the marketing function of business activity engages in CSR and sustainability issues. Specific topics will cover how these issues are influenced by consumer trends and how they are communicated to consumers. Marketing problems found in the non-profit, for-profit and public sectors will be examined, and responsible (and irresponsible) marketing practices will be explored. Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 465 School of Retailing Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Practical application of marketing and related business skills and theory to a problem or issues addressed during a period of 13 weeks of summer placement in a sponsoring retailing or services organization. The internship includes preliminary instruction and requires, under the supervision of the Faculty, the presentation of a project report to the sponsoring organization. Prerequisites: MARK 301 and consent of Department.
MARK 466 Service Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students are introduced to the important differences between marketing tangible products and marketing services. The unique nature of services is examined and the importance of service quality to both consumer and business to business customers, is emphasized. The marketing mix variables are discussed from the service perspective. Designing a marketing mix for service, not-for-profit and government institutions poses interesting and formidable challenges which are dealt with in terms of marketing planning, implementation and control. Trade barriers to the global marketing of services, together with other global service issues are also given attention. Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 468 Retailing and Channel Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students are introduced to the activities involved in retailing goods and services to consumers and to the elements that make up effective distribution channels. Retailing topics include the evolution of retailing, store location, store image, shopping behavior, retail marketing strategies and current trends in retailing management. Channel management topics include: channel structure, designing the marketing channel, channel relationships and responsibilities, selecting channel members, and physical distribution and transportation. Effective channel management, the application of marketing planning, and analysis of retailing and channel management are also examined Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 470 Selling and Sales Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of selling and management of the sales force in diverse modern business environments. Topics include sales strategies, sales force planning, organization and evaluation, recruiting, selection and training, leadership and motivation, sales forecasting quotas and types of compensation. Prerequisite: MARK 301.
MARK 472 Product Management and Pricing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development, management and pricing of interrelated goods and services. New product development, managing a product portfolio, bundling of goods and services, and tailoring price and product to different segments. Prerequisites: MARK 301 and BUEC 311.
MARK 488 Selected Topics in Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth- year Business students. Prerequisites: MARK 301 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
MARK 490 Marketing Competition Part I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Preparation for Student Competition in Marketing. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
MARK 491 Marketing Competition Part II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Completion of Student Competition in Marketing. Prerequisite: MARK 490 and consent of Instructor.
MARK 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MARK 312 or equivalent, consent of Instructor and Associate Dean Undergraduate Program.
MARK 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MARK 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
MARK 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: MARK 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
MARK 502 Principles of Marketing Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course commences with an examination of core marketing concepts, including strategic marketing planning, segmentation and the marketing mix (product, price, place and promotion) and the integration of these concepts into a marketing plan. Specific focus is then provided to developing pragmatic skills regarding marketing effectiveness.
MARK 612 Marketing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an examination of marketing research methodologies emphasizing the translation of marketing problems into researchable form, research design, data gathering, data analysis, and implementation of research results. Prerequisite: MARK 502. Credit will not be given for both MARK 612 and 620.
MARK 624 Consumer Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The psychology behind consumer decision-making and its implications for marketing practice. Internal (e.g. attention and perception, needs and motivation, learning and memory) and external factors (e.g. social influence, situational influence) will be considered to gain theoretical and practical insights. Topics such as social media, word of mouth, and consumer-brand relationships are also covered. Prerequisite: MARK 502.
MARK 630 Marketing Communications and Branding Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces the student to the management of marketing communications with an emphasis on the evolving nature of marketing communication tools. It also introduces the techniques used in the creation, nurturing and leveraging of brand assets in an environment where consumer and cultural influences strongly interact with strategic marketing decisions to impact brand meaning and value. Prerequisite: MARK 502.
MARK 644 International Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics in international marketing, including the importance of international marketing to Canadian business, comparative marketing systems, evaluation of socioeconomic influences on international marketing, and marketing strategies as they relate to firm size. Prerequisite: MARK 502.
MARK 655 Sustainability and Responsible Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Marketing plays a large role in and is affected by corporate social responsibility (CSR) and sustainability issues. This course will explore, examine and inform how the marketing function of business activity engages in CSR and sustainability issues. Specific topics will cover how these issues are influenced by consumer trends and how they are communicated to consumers. Marketing problems found in the non-profit, for-profit and public sectors will be examined, and responsible (and irresponsible) marketing practices will be explored. Prerequisite: MARK 502.
MARK 664 Product Management and Pricing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Development, management and pricing of interrelated goods and services. New product development, pricing strategies for new products, managing a product portfolio, bundling of goods and services and pricing the bundles, and tailoring price and product to different segments. Prerequisites: MARK 502, and BUEC 502 or 503.
MARK 686 Selected Topics in Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
MARK 710 Research Methodology in Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The nature of scientific inquiry and its relevance and application to research in marketing. The development and testing of marketing theory. Marketing measurement methodology. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Students may not receive credit for both MARK 701 and 710.
MARK 720 Buyer Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is concerned with the impact of environmental factors on consumers, as well as the impact of marketing on society. In particular, this course will provide an intensive examination of external factors including situational variables and sociocultural influences on consumer behaviour. Macro issues relevant to the impact of marketing on society will also be considered, with a focus on issues relevant to mass communication and public policy. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 725 Human Judgment And Decision Making Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will familiarize students with theories of cognitive information processing and affective processes as they relate to consumer judgments and decisions. More specifically, the cognitive component of this course will provide an intensive examination of memory, perception, attitude formation, and behavioural decision theory. The affect component of the course will deal with factors influencing affect formation as well as the impact of affect on attitudes and decision making. Research methods underlying each of these streams of information will be examined. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 740 Marketing Models Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course describes theoretical and empirical models used to analyze marketing management issues in the areas of product introduction and positioning, pricing, advertising, and distribution channels. The theoretical structure in the course comes from microeconomics of firm and consumer decision making, with special consideration of competitive issues analyzed with game theory and some applications of control theory. The empirical work draws from conjoint analysis, choice modeling, and multivariate techniques. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 750 Marketing Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Recent and classic contributions to marketing theory development. The course addresses conceptual development and current practice in marketing decision-making. Topics critically examined include marketing orientation, competitive interaction, product development and introduction, channel relationship management, customer relationship management, advertising and promotion, pricing and revenues, and sales, service and quality. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 797 Current Research in Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of recently published research in marketing with an emphasis on the research interests of enrolled students not adequately covered in other marketing doctoral courses. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 799 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special studies for advanced students. Prerequisites: Registration in the Business PhD Program or permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
MARK 830 Marketing Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding the role of marketing in determining the direction of an organization; the customer-focused organization; opportunity identification; forecasting demand; marketing segmentation; market planning, and implementation. Restricted to executive MBA students only.
#
Master of Internetworking
MINT
Department of Computing Science Faculty of Science
Graduate Courses
MINT 700 The Physical Layer Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Communication media, including copper, optical fiber and wireless. Modulation and coding standards. Framing. Error control techniques. MAN and WAN physical layers, including PDH, SONET/SDH, aATM, cable modems, xDSL, AMPS, GSM, GPRS, etc. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 702 Data Communication Protocols Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Structure of communication protocols, with an emphasis on the data link layer. SDLC and HDLC. Medium access control techniques. AAA. Local area, metropolitan area and wireless standards: Ethernet, 802.11 and Bluetooth. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 704 The Internet Protocol Suite Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Rationale and organization of the Internet protocols. IP, UDP, TCP, ICMP, ARP, RARP, Mobile-IP. Addressing and routing; intradomain routing protocols. Transport layer congestion control and flow control. IP over everything. Rationale and organization of the Internet protocols. IP, UDP, TCP, ICMP, ARP, RARP, Mobile-IP. Addressing and routing; intradomain routing protocols. Transport layer congestion control and flow control. IP over everything. Rationale and organization of the Internet protocols. IP, UDP, TCP, ICMP, ARP, RARP, Mobile-IP. Addressing and routing; intradomain routing protocols. Transport layer congestion control and flow control. IP over everything. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 706 Internet Application and Programming Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Concepts of Internet Applications. Sockets, client- server programming, proxies and gateways, performance, application programming, basic security, example application protocols: SMTP, HTTP, and how to implement them. Possible source code inspection exercises covering wget/HTTP. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 708 Internet Laboratory Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Demonstration of network principles. Practical aspects of network design and implementations. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 709 Internet Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 60 hours). Capstone project involving the design or analysis of a significant internetwork or internetworking component. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 712 Internet Security Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Security: vulnerabilities of Internet protocols, penetration techniques and defenses, intrusion detection systems. Cryptography: Public and private key cryptography, key negotiation, certificates. E-commerce security standards for both protocols and hosts. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 715 Advanced Routing and Network Management Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Distance vector, link state and hybrid protocols. Intra- domain vs. inter-domain protocols. Multi-protocol routing and route redistribution. Network management protocols and procedures: autodiscovery, performance monitoring, fault isolation. Offered by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 717 Internet Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Phases of implementing a new network. Phases of a network hardware or software upgrade. Risk management. Management tools including PERT, CPM, etc. Process mapping. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 718 Optical Network Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). MINT 718 addresses the theory and practice of high-capacity optical access and transport networks. Experience is gained designing and characterizing optical links, configuring various forms of transport protection and restoration (linear 1+1, UPSR and BLSR rings), and designing gigabit passive optical (GPON) access networks. Restricted to students who are admitted via the Engineering route. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 719 Special Topics in Internet Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Intended to enable individual students to study special internet topics under the supervision of a faculty member. Approval must be obtained from the program coordinator. Offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 720 VoIP and MPLS Network Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). This course provides detailed implementation of MPLS and VoIP networks. This is a hands on course and students have to design and configure MPLS, layer2/layer3 VPN’s. VPLS, Cisco Call Manager, Asterisk (open source PBX). We will be using variety of equipment from vendors like Cisco and Alcatel-Lucent. This course is offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computing Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
MINT 725 SDN and NFV Concepts Architecture Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). This course explains and analyzes the disruptive and promising technologies of Software Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) that offer many benefits over the current approach and practices related to data network design and management. These benefits include optimization and simplification resulting from control and data plane separation, and orchestration of highvalue functions. The course will start with SDN and NFV basics and architecture, move to advanced topics including SDN controller design and deployment, SDN and NFV use cases discussion and deployment, and then finish with discussion of the next steps in the evolution of the SDN / NFV ecosystem in the data networking industry. The course will provide the knowledge and skills required for many engaging, challenging, and industry relevant capstone projects on advanced topics in SDN and NFV customization and development, which students may further wish to undertake as part of their program.
MINT 727 Advanced Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 36 hours). Students will learn how to apply their base project management knowledge through case analysis, discussion, and scenarios. The program will focus on project management strategies, decisions, issues, and risks typical of projects within the information and communication technology (ICT) sector including IT Service Management. The course will emphasize written and verbal presentation skills. Students will be required to attend lectures, present their analysis, and participate in small-group workshops. This course is offered jointly by the Department of Electrical and Computing Engineering and the Department of Computing Science.
#
Materials Engineering
MAT E
Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering Faculty of Engineering
The following courses were renumbered effective 2007 - 2008:
Old New Old New
MAT E 251 MAT E 201 
MAT E 252 MAT E 202 
MAT E 440 MAT E 470 
MAT E 441 MAT E 468
MAT E 442 MAT E 469
MAT E 480 MAT E 471
Undergraduate Courses
MAT E 201 Materials Science I Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the science of materials from the standpoint of the relationships between atomic, molecular and crystal structure to material properties. Atomic bonding, crystal structure and crystal imperfections. Structures of metallic, non-metallic and composite materials. Diffusion, electrochemical and corrosion properties; strengthening mechanisms, mechanical properties and failure; electrical conductors, semiconductors, and dielectrics; thermal, magnetic, and optical properties. Prerequisite: CHEM 105 or consent of Department.
MAT E 202 Materials Science II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). An introduction to the science of materials relating their mechanical, thermal, electronic, and chemical properties to atomic, molecular, and crystal structure. Ceramic and metallic crystals, glasses, polymers, and composite materials. Multi-phase materials, phase transformations, and strengthening processes. Laboratories include mechanical properties of materials, microstructure, heat treatment of steel, and hands on design experiments. Prerequisite: CHEM 105 or consent of Department.
MAT E 204 Materials Engineering Thermodynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Fundamentals of thermodynamics in Materials Engineering. Review of thermodynamic functions. First, second and third laws. Reaction equilibria, stability diagrams. Solution thermodynamics applied to materials processes. Phase relations, free energy-composition diagrams, binary phase diagrams, and introduction to ternary phase diagrams. Electrochemistry. Experimental methods and estimation of thermodynamic data. Prerequisite: CH E 243. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 340 or 301.
MAT E 211 Characterization of Materials Œ3.9 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-3/4). Techniques for characterization of materials. Elements of crystallography. Optical microscopy and image analysis, diffraction techniques, electron microscopy, surface science techniques, wet chemical techniques, non-destructive characterization, emerging techniques. Prerequisite: MAT E 202 or consent of Department.
MAT E 221 Powder Fabrication and Processing Œ3.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-0). Characteristics of particles including size, shape, textures, surface area and surface charges, etc. Top-down and bottom- up techniques of particle synthesis. Powder fabrication techniques for minerals, metals and ceramics. Particle separation techniques based on size and type. Stability of particulate dispersions, Consolidation. Prerequisite: MAT E 202 or consent of Department.
MAT E 301 Materials Engineering Thermodynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Fundamentals of thermodynamics in materials engineering. Review of thermodynamic functions. First, second and third laws. Reaction equilibria, stability diagrams. Solution thermodynamics applied to materials processes. Phase relations, free energy-composition diagrams. Electrochemistry. Experimental methods and estimation of thermodynamic data. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 340 or 204. Prerequisite: CH E 243.
MAT E 335 Phase Transformations I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (first term, 3-1s-0). Atomic mechanisms of solid state diffusion and diffusion in multicomponent and multiphase systems. Thermodynamics of mass transfer, and microstructure evolution in liquid-solid and vapor-solid transformations. Interfaces in crystals, interphase boundaries and phase shapes. Applications in solidification processes, casting, welding, vapour deposition and sputtering methods. Prerequisites: MAT E 211, and 204 or 301.
MAT E 336 Phase Transformations II Œ3.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-0). Diffusional and diffusionless solid state transformations. Applications in: alloy heat treating, surface treatment, and ceramics. Prerequisite: MAT E 335.
MAT E 341 Applied Electrochemistry Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Electrochemical reactions, equilibrium electrode potentials, cell potentials and Pourbaix diagrams. Electrochemical reaction kinetics, Butler-Volmer Model, polarization and Tafel equations. Electrochemical measurements including linear polarization resistance and monitoring. Metal recovery from solutions, electroplating, electrowinning, electroless plating. Batteries, fuel cells. Prerequisite: MAT E 301 or 204, or CH E 343.
MAT E 345 Corrosion, Oxidation, and Degradation Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-0). The environments materials experience in service. Theory of corrosion. The eight forms of corrosion. Corrosion measurements, protection, coatings, materials selection, and designing for corrosion. High temperature oxidation and its control. Degradation of non-metallic materials. Prerequisites: MAT E 201 or 202, and MAT E 341.
MAT E 351 Mechanical Properties Œ3.5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-0). Stress/strain relationships and tensile testing. Dislocation theory, twinning and plastic deformation. Strengthening mechanisms. Fundamentals of fracture, failure mechanisms, fracture mechanics and fracture testing. Prerequisites: CIV E 270, MAT E 211, and MAT E 335.
MAT E 361 Materials Engineering Laboratory I Œ2.3 (fi 5) (first term, 1-1s-3/2). Experimental data processing and report writing. Materials processing, characterization, and testing. Particle size reduction and separation. Prerequisites: MAT E 211 and STAT 235.
MAT E 362 Materials Engineering Laboratory II Œ2.3 (fi 5) (second term, 1-1s-3/2). Technical report writing. Advanced materials processing, characterization, and testing. Stability of particulate dispersions. Prerequisites: MAT E 361.
MAT E 461 Materials Engineering Laboratory III Œ3.5 (fi 5) (either term, 1-1s-4). Advanced technical report writing. Integration of materials characterization and testing techniques for problem solving. Integration of materials processing techniques for process development. Prerequisite: MAT E 362.
MAT E 464 Materials Process Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-3). Engineering design concepts in materials processing. Cost estimation. Project planning and scheduling. Plant safety and hazards analysis. Selected project design examples. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 365. Prerequisites: CME 265 and MAT E 204 or 301. Corequisites: CH E 314, ENG M 310 or 401, and ENGG 404.
MAT E 465 Materials Design Project Œ5 (fi 8) (second term, 3-1s-3). Team materials design projects. Feasibility study and detailed materials design including: selection of materials and manufacturing processes; cost analysis; safety, social, and environmental considerations; failure modes; and microstructural specifications. Projects will require students to exercise creative and critical thinking, decision making, and demonstrate integration of Materials Engineering practice and synthesis of technical knowledge rather than simply analyse existing designs. Prerequisites: ENGG 404, MAT E 336, 345, 351 and 464.
MAT E 466 Special Topics in Materials Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An advanced treatment of selected Materials Engineering topics of current interest. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
MAT E 470 Process Dynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). The study of diffusion, mass transfer and reaction kinetics in materials process engineering. The fundamental equations governing mass transfer are applied to study the rate of metallurgical processes. The use of dimensional analysis in scale-up of reactors and mixing in batch and continuous processes is also presented. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 440. Prerequisites: MAT E 204 or 301, and CH E 312. Corequisite: CH E 314.
MAT E 471 Ceramics Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Structure, processing, characterization, properties and application of ceramic materials and glass. Ceramic raw materials. Crystal chemistry and physics. Glassy state. Crystal defects, nonstoichiometry, diffusion, phase diagrams. Powder preparation, ceramic fabrication. Characterization of ceramic powders and components. Thermal, mechanical and electrical properties. Traditional and recent applications. Prerequisite: MAT E 341 or consent of instructor.
MAT E 474 Performance of Materials Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Behaviour of materials in service, such as wear and tribology, creep, fatigue, fracture, corrosion, oxidation, other environmental effects, and their interactions and synergies. Failure analysis and surface engineering concepts. Case studies will be used to illustrate principles and synthesize knowledge. Prerequisites: MAT E 336 and 345.
MAT E 476 Microalloyed Steels Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). The physical metallurgy and processing of microalloyed steels and the associated microstructure/processing/ property relationship. Usage of microalloyed steels in pipelines including design, forming and welding. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 489. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
MAT E 491 Solid State Physics of Materials Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Band theory of materials. Semiconductors and dielectric materials, piezoelectrics and thermoelectrics, magnetic and superconducting materials. Semiconductors, doping, p-n junctions, solar cells. Low and high Tc superconducting materials, processing and properties. Thermoelectric materials and Seebeck, Thomson, and Peltier effects.
MAT E 494 Nanostructured Materials Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Fabrication and application of 1D, 2D, and 3D nanostructured materials. Nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, graphene, thin films, and nanocomposites. Optical, electrical, and mechanical properties and characterization techniques. Co-requisite: MAT E 390 or 490.
MAT E 495 Nanomaterials and Biomedical Applications Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Survey of nanostructured materials, including processing techniques, properties (mechanical, physical and chemical), characterization, and characterization tools. Introduction to biomedical applications of nanomaterials for diagnosis, therapy and medical implants. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained in MAT E 458. Prerequisite: CH E 243 or equivalent, or consent of instructor
Graduate Courses
MAT E 630 Special Topics in Process Metallurgy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Topics of current interest related to process metallurgy, such as welding, process analysis, mathematical modelling and simulation, metal extraction from secondary sources, iron and steel making, physical chemistry of molten systems and production of industrial minerals.
MAT E 640 Advanced Materials Thermodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Advanced topics in core fundamentals of materials thermodynamics. Thermodynamic laws, statistical thermodynamics, reaction equilibria, phase diagrams, solutions, changing standard states, electrochemistry, and thermodynamics of surfaces. Prerequisite: MAT E 204 or 301, or consent of Instructor.
MAT E 645 Electrochemical Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Aqueous, molten and solid electrolytes: thermodynamics, structure, transport properties. Applications of conductivity measurements. Electrodes: types, reactions, potential. Electrochemical cells. Applications of EMF measurements. Electrical double layer, electrode kinetics, overpotential. Chlor-alkali industry, electrometallurgy, electrolysis of water, electroplating. Electrochemical energy conversion: primary and secondary batteries, fuel cells. High temperature applications. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
MAT E 653 Stress Corrosion Cracking Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). The role of corrodents, stresses and microstructure in the phenomena of stress corrosion cracking; dissolution models and mechanical models proposed as mechanisms. Stress corrosion of high-strength steels, stainless steels and the principal nonferrous metals. Stress corrosion testing and methods of preventing stress corrosion cracking. Prerequisite: MAT E 345 or consent of Instructor.
MAT E 654 Electrochemical Theory of Corrosion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Principles and applications of electrochemical corrosion theory in basic and applied research. Equilibrium thermodynamics and electrode kinetics. Passivation and breakdown of passivity. The study of galvanic corrosion; alloy evaluation. Corrosion testing methods and electrochemical measurement of corrosion rates. Prerequisite: MAT E 345 or consent of Instructor.
MAT E 662 Fracture of Materials Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Theoretical strength of solids, Griffith crack theory, mechanisms of brittle and ductile fracture, the ductile to brittle transition, fatigue and creep fracture, environmental effects on fracture. Prerequisites: MAT E 358 or consent of Instructor. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if credit has already been obtained in MAT E 462.
MAT E 665 Materials Applications of Transmission Electron Microscopy Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Fundamental principles of electron scattering and of the transmission electron microscope, space group theory and application to crystal structure determination, electron diffraction theory, crystallography of precipitation and of defects, TEM imaging theory and application to materials analysis, analytical electron spectrometry. Prerequisite: Graduate student standing or consent of Instructor.
MAT E 666 Materials Applications of Scanning Electron Microscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Principles and design of the scanning electron microscope, electron beam-specimen interactions, image formation, x-ray microanalysis in the scanning electron microscope, specimen preparation, application to materials analysis. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
MAT E 669 Nano Functional Materials Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Band theory and solid state properties. Thin film growth at the nanoscale. Semiconductors and dielectric materials, piezoelectrics and thermoelectrics. Semiconductors, doping, p-n junctions, solar cells. Thermoelectric materials and the Seebeck, Thomson, and Peltier Effects. Optical and electrical property measurement.
MAT E 673 Welding Metallurgy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Weld thermal cycles; fusion zone solidification; phase transformations, heat affected zone phenomena; cracking during welding; ferrous and non-ferrous weldments.
MAT E 680 Advanced Ceramics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Important ceramic materials and products, processing, typical properties. Structure: binary and ternary compounds, crystalline silicates, glass. Point defects, nonstoichiometry, defect reactions, dislocations. Diffusion, electrochemical transport, examples. Thermal and mechanical properties, thermal shock resistance, electrical conduction. Applications: solid electrolytes, energy conversion systems, refractories, electronics. Prerequisites: Consent of Instructor. Credit cannot be obtained in this course if credit has already been obtained in MAT E 471.
MAT E 689 Advanced Processing of Microalloyed Steels Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Advanced processing and metallurgy of microalloyed steels for pipelines. Steelmaking, casting, microstructural development during thermomechanical processing, pipe fabrication, mechanical and chemical properties and in service performance. Prerequisites: Consent of Instructor.
MAT E 694 Advanced Topics in Materials Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An advanced treatment of materials engineering topics of current interest to staff and students.
MAT E 738 Process Metallurgy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0).
#
Mathematical Physics
MA PH
Departments of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences; Physics Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
Note: Permission to enrol in any mathematical physics course will not normally be granted unless the stated prerequisites have been met. However, students may enrol in a mathematical physics course if their department and the course instructor agree that their background and academic standing warrant the waiver of the stated prerequisites.
MA PH 343 Classical Mechanics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles of mechanics; non-inertial frames; Lagrange’s equations and Hamilton’s principle; dynamics of oscillating systems; rigid body kinematics and dynamics; Hamiltonian methods and canonical transformations. Prerequisite: PHYS 244, MATH 215 or 317.
MA PH 451 Mathematical Methods of Physics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application to problems in physics of method of steepest descent, Fourier and Laplace transforms; boundary-value problems, integral equations, and Green’s functions. Prerequisites: MATH 311 or 411, and 337, or equivalents.
MA PH 468 Introduction to Relativity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Special relativity; principle of equivalence; Einstein field equations; stationary and static fields; Schwarzschild metric, experimental tests; black holes; linearized equations; gravitational collapse; cosmology. Prerequisite: MATH 337 or equivalent.
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for graduate credit: MA PH 343, 451, 468.
#
Mathematics
MATH
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences Faculty of Science
See Mathematical Physics (MA PH) listing for courses offered jointly by the Department of Physics and the Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences.
Undergraduate Courses
MATH 100 Calculus I Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Review of numbers, inequalities, functions, analytic geometry; limits, continuity; derivatives and applications, Taylor polynomials; log, exp, and inverse trig functions. Integration, fundamental theorem of calculus substitution, trapezoidal and Simpson’s rules. Prerequisites: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent, and Mathematics 31. Notes: (1) Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100. (2) Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. (3) Restricted to Engineering students. Non-Engineering students who take this course will receive *3.0.
MATH 101 Calculus II Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Area between curves, techniques of integration. Applications of integration to planar areas and lengths, volumes and masses. First order ordinary differential equations: separable, linear, direction fields, Euler’s method, applications. Infinite series, power series, Taylor expansions with remainder terms. Polar coordinates. Rectangular, spherical and cylindrical coordinates in 3-dimensional space. Parametric curves in the plane and space: graphing, arc length, curvature; normal binormal, tangent plane in 3-dimensional space. Volumes and surface areas of rotation. Prerequisite: MATH 100. Notes: (1) Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100. (2) Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. (3) Restricted to Engineering students. Non-Engineering students who take this course will receive *3.0.
MATH 102 Applied Linear Algebra Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Vectors and matrices, solution of linear equations, equations of lines and planes, determinants, matrix algebra, orthogonality and applications (Gram-Schmidt), eigenvalues and eigenvectors and applications, complex numbers. Prerequisite or corequisite MATH 100. Notes: (1) Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 102, 120, 125, or 127. (2) Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. (3) Restricted to Engineering students. Non-Engineering students who take this course will receive *3.0.
MATH 113 Elementary Calculus I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of analytic geometry. Differentiation of elementary, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Applications of the derivative. Integration. Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Prerequisite: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100.
MATH 114 Elementary Calculus I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of analytic geometry. Differentiation of elementary, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Applications of the derivative. Integration. Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Prerequisite: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100.
MATH 115 Elementary Calculus II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Inverse trigonometric functions. Techniques of integration. Improper integrals. Applications of the definite integral. Introduction to differential equations. Prerequisite: MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, or 144, or equivalent. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100.
MATH 117 Honors Calculus I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Functions, continuity, and the derivative. Applications of the derivative. Extended limits and L’Hospital’s rule. Prerequisites: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent, and Mathematics 31 or equivalent, or consent of Department. Notes: (1) This course is designed for students with at least 80 percent in Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 and Mathematics 31. (2) Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100. (3) Engineering students will receive a weight of 4.0 units for this course.
MATH 118 Honors Calculus II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Integration and the Fundamental Theorem. Techniques and applications of integration. Derivatives and integrals of the exponential, and trigonometric functions. Introduction to infinite series. Introduction to partial derivatives. Prerequisite: MATH 117 or its equivalent. Students with MATH 100, 113, 114, 134, or 144 will be admitted with consent of Department. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100. Engineering students will receive a weight of 4.0 units for this course.
MATH 125 Linear Algebra I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Systems of linear equations. Vectors in n-space, vector equations of lines and planes. Matrix algebra, inverses and invertibility. Introduction to linear transformations. Subspaces of n-space. Determinants. Introduction to eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The dot product and orthogonality. Applications in a variety of fields, numerical methods. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1. Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 102, 120, 125 or 127.
MATH 127 Honors Linear Algebra I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Systems of linear equations; vectors in Euclidean n-space; span and linear independence in Euclidean n-space; dot and cross product; orthogonality; lines and planes; matrix arithmetic; determinants; introduction to eigenvectors and eigenvalues; introduction to linear transformations; complex numbers; vector space axioms; subspaces and quotients. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of Math 102, 120,125, or 127.
MATH 134 Calculus for the Life Sciences I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The derivative as a rate of change. Differentiation of elementary, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. The definite integral as a summation. Integration. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Applications of the derivative and the definite integral in the context of the life sciences. Prerequisite: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100.
MATH 144 Calculus for the Physical Sciences I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tangents, velocity, and derivatives. Differentiation of elementary, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. The derivative as a rate of change. Area, displacement, and the definite integral. Integration. Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Applications of the derivative and the definite integral in the context of the physical sciences. Prerequisite: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1 or equivalent. Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 100, 113, 114, 117, 134, 144, or SCI 100.
MATH 146 Calculus for the Physical Sciences II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Inverse trigonometric functions. Techniques of integration. Improper integrals. Volumes, arc length, surface area, and work. Introduction to differential equations. Applications in the context of the physical sciences. Prerequisite: MATH 100 or 113 or 114 or 117 or 134 or 144 or equivalent. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100.
MATH 153 Elementary Theory of Interest =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Simple and compound interest, simple and general annuities certain; variable annuities and perpetuities, amortization schedules, sinking funds, applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1. Notes: (1) This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 253. (2) May not be used for credit in any Honors or Specialization degrees offered by the Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences.
MATH 160 Higher Arithmetic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elementary Number Theory, Numeration Systems, Number Systems and Elementary Probability Theory. Math Fair. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2, or consent of Department. Notes: (1) This course is restricted to Elementary Education students. (2) This course cannot be used for credit towards a Science degree.
MATH 201 Differential Equations Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). First-order equations; second- order linear equations: reduction of order, variation of parameters; Laplace transform; linear systems; power series; solution by series; separation of variables for PDEs. Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 209 or 214. Notes: (1) Open only to students in Engineering, Specialization Physics, and Specialization Geophysics. (2) This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in any of MATH 205, 334, or 336. (3) Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. Non-Engineering students who take this course will receive *3.0.
MATH 209 Calculus III Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Partial differentiation, derivatives of integrals. Multiple integration using rectangular, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates. Vector Field Theory. Prerequisite: MATH 101. Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 102. Notes: (1) Students in all sections of this course will write a common final examination. (2) Restricted to Engineering students. Non-Engineering students who take this course will receive *3.0.
MATH 214 Intermediate Calculus I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Infinite Series. Plane curves and polar coordinates. Three dimensional analytic geometry. Partial derivatives. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 209 or MATH 217. Prerequisite: MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100 or equivalent.
MATH 215 Intermediate Calculus II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). First order and second order linear differential equations with constant coefficients. Curves, tangent vectors, arc length, integration in two and three dimensions, polar cylindrical and spherical coordinates, line and surface integrals. Green’s divergence and Stokes’ theorems. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 209 or 317. Prerequisite: MATH 214 or equivalent.
MATH 217 Honors Advanced Calculus I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Axiomatic development of the real number system. Topology of Rn. Sequences, limits and continuity. Multi-variable calculus: differentiation and integration, including integration in spherical and polar coordinates. The differential and the chain rule. Taylor’s Formula, maxima and minima. Introduction to vector field theory. Prerequisites: MATH 118 (or MATH 101, 115, 146, or SCI 100 with consent of Department) and any linear algebra course. Engineering students will receive a weight of 4.0 units for this course.
MATH 222 Introduction to Discrete Mathematics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A problem-solving approach to discrete mathematics, covering secret codes, public-key codes, error-correcting codes, enumeration, recurrence relations, induction, graph theory, graph algorithms and parallel algorithms. Prerequisite: Any 100-level mathematics course or SCI 100, MATH 120, 125 or 127 recommended.
MATH 225 Linear Algebra II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Vector spaces. Inner product spaces. Examples of n-space and the space of continuous functions. Gram-Schmidt process, QR factorization of a matrix and least squares. Linear transformations, change of basis, similarity and diagonalization. Orthogonal diagonalization, quadratic forms. Applications in a variety of fields, numerical methods. Prerequisites: A 100-level linear algebra course, and one of Mathematics 31 or a 100-level calculus course. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 225 or 227.
MATH 227 Honors Linear Algebra II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Review of vector space axioms, subspaces and quotients; span; linear independence; Gram-Schmidt process; projections; methods of least squares; linear transformations and their matrix representations with respect to arbitrary bases; change of basis; eigenvectors and eigenvalues; triangularization and diagonalization; canonical forms (Schur, Jordan, spectral theorem). Prerequisite: MATH 127 or equivalent. Students with MATH 102 or 125 will be admitted with consent of Department. Note: Credit can be obtained in at most one of MATH 225 or 227.
MATH 228 Algebra: Introduction to Ring Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integers. Mathematical induction. Equivalence relations. Commutative rings, including the integers mod n, complex numbers and polynomials. The Chinese remainder theorem. Fields and integral domains. Euclidean domains, principal ideal domains and unique factorization. Quotient rings and homomorphisms. Construction of finite fields. Applications such as public domain encryption, Latin squares and designs, polynomial error detecting codes, and/or addition and multiplication of large integers. Prerequisite: Any linear algebra course. Credit for MATH 228 cannot be obtained if credit for MATH 326 has been already obtained.
MATH 241 Geometry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic Euclidean geometry, congruence, parallelism, area, and similarity. Sound axiomatic development with emphasis on problem solving. Constructions and loci, inequalities, maxima and minima, circles, isometries, and additional topics. Prerequisites: Any 100-level Mathematics course or SCI 100.
MATH 243 Transformation Geometry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Transformation geometry, isometry and homothety, applications in Euclidean geometry; the algebra of transformations, the Classification Theorem, frieze patterns and wall-paper groups. Prerequisite: MATH 241
MATH 253 Theory of Interest =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Accumulation and amount functions, effective, nominal, simple, and compound rates, force of interest and discount, simple and general annuities certain, variable annuities and perpetuities, amortization schedules and sinking funds, bonds and other securities, applications, installment loans, depreciation, depletion, capitalized cost. Prerequisite: MATH 101, 115, 118, 146, or SCI 100 or equivalent. Corequisite: MATH 209 or 214.
MATH 260 Mathematical Reasoning for Teachers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reasoning and problem solving in the context of logic, algebra, geometry, and combinatorics. Prerequisite: MATH 160, or consent of Department. Notes: (1) This course is restricted to Elementary Education students. (2) This course cannot be used for credit towards a Science degree.
MATH 300 Advanced Boundary Value Problems I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Derivation of the classical partial differential equations of applied mathematics, solutions using separation of variables. Fourier expansions and their applications to boundary value problems. Introduction to Fourier Transforms. Emphasis on building an appropriate mathematical model from a physical problem, solving the mathematical problem, and carefully interpreting the mathematical results in the context of the original physical problem. Prerequisites: MATH 201 and 209 or equivalents. Notes: (1) Open only to students in Engineering, Specialization Physics, and Specialization Geophysics. (2) This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 337.
MATH 309 Mathematical Methods for Electrical Engineers Œ3 (fi 6) (first term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Complex numbers, analytic functions, Cauchy-Riemann equation, Cauchy Theorem, power series and Laurent expansions, residues, inverse Laplace transform. Complex inner product spaces, orthogonal expansions, Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization completeness, Fourier expansions applied to signals, Parseval’s relation and Bessel’s inequality. Prerequisite: MATH 209. Notes: (1) Restricted to Engineering students. (2) This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 311 or 411.
MATH 311 Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Complex numbers. Complex series. Functions of a complex variable. Cauchy’s theorem and contour integration. Residue Theorem and its applications. Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 209 or 215.
MATH 314 Analysis I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Construction of real numbers, Heine-Borel and related theorems, differentiation and Riemann integral of functions, topological concepts in metric spaces, sequences, continuous maps, contraction maps, and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 209 or 215 or equivalent. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 217.
MATH 317 Honors Advanced Calculus II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). Implicit function theorem. Transformations of multiple integrals. Line integrals, theorems of Green, Gauss and Stokes. Sequences and series of functions. Uniform convergence. Prerequisite: MATH 217.
MATH 322 Graph Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Graphs, paths and cycles, trees, planarity and duality, coloring problems, digraphs, matching problems, matroid theory. Prerequisite: MATH 120 or 125 or equivalent and any 200-level MATH course. MATH 222 recommended.
MATH 324 Elementary Number Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Divisibility, prime numbers, congruences, quadratic residues, quadratic reciprocity, arithmetic functions and diophantine equations; sums of squares. Prerequisites: MATH 228 (or 128 or 223).
MATH 325 Linear Algebra III =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Hermitian and unitary matrices, spectral theorem. Jordan canonical form. Cayley-Hamilton Theorem. Bilinear forms, positive- definiteness, Sylvester’s Law of inertia, geometric lattices. Numerical methods. Application to discrete system evolution, matrix exponentials and differential equations. Prerequisites: MATH 225. Note: May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 227.
MATH 326 Rings and Modules =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Rings, fields, polynomials, algebras. Homomorphisms, ideals, quotients. Ring extensions, field extensions, construction of finite fields. Integral domains: Euclidean, principal ideal, unique factorization. Chain conditions. Introduction to modules. Modules over a principal ideal domain, finitely generated abelian groups, matrix canonical forms. Prerequisite MATH 227, or both MATH 225 and 228.
MATH 328 Algebra: Introduction to Group Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Groups, subgroups, homomorphisms. Symmetry groups. Matrix groups. Permutations, symmetric group, Cayley’s Theorem. Group actions. Cosets and Lagrange’s Theorem. Normal subgroups, quotient groups, isomorphism theorems. Direct and semidirect products. Finite Abelian groups. Prerequisite: MATH 227 or 228. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 229.
MATH 334 Introduction to Differential Equations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). First order equations, linear equations of higher order. Power series solution. Laplace transform methods. Introduction to special functions. Introduction to linear systems. Prerequisites: MATH 125 or 127 and one of MATH 209, 214 or 217. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 201.
MATH 337 Introduction to Partial Differential Equations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Boundary value problems of classical Math Physics, orthogonal expansions, classical special functions. Advanced transform techniques. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in either MATH 300 or equivalent. Prerequisites: MATH 215, and MATH 334 or 336.
MATH 341 Geometry of Convex Sets =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Combinatorial geometry and topology, convex sets, sets with constant width, Helly-type problems, extremal problems. Prerequisite: MATH 120 or 125 or equivalent, MATH 222 or MATH 241.
MATH 343 Projective and Inversive Geometries =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Projective geometry, Poncelet-Steiner constructions, inverse geometry, Mohr-Mascheroni constructions, Principle of Duality, conic sections. Prerequisite: MATH 241.
MATH 347 Set Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Axioms for set theory, transfinite induction, cardinal and ordinal numbers, applications. Primarily intended for students enrolled in an honors or specialization program in mathematics. Prerequisite: One of MATH 215, 217, 228, 328.
MATH 348 Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Frenet-Seret theory of curves in the plane and in 3-space, examples; local theory of surfaces in 3-space: first and second fundamental forms, Gauss map and Gauss curvature, geodesics and parallel transport, theorema egregium, mean curvature and minimal surfaces. Prerequisites: One of MATH 102, 125 or 127 and one of MATH 209, 215 or 217.
MATH 356 Introduction to Mathematical Finance I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Simple Market Model: one-step binomial model, basic notions and assumptions. Risk-Free Assets: simple interest, zero-coupon bonds, money market account. Risky Assets: dynamic of stock prices, binomial tree model, trinomial tree model. Discrete time market model: stock and money market model, extended models. Portfolio management: risk, two securities, capital asset pricing model. Prerequisite: MATH 253 and STAT 265 or consent of the Department.
MATH 357 Introduction to Mathematical Finance II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Forward and futures contracts: forward and futures prices, hedging with futures. Options: put-call parity, bounds on option prices, time value of options. Option pricing: European and American options in the binomial tree model, Black-Scholes formula. Financial engineering: hedging option positions, hedging business risk. Variable interest rates: maturity-independent yields, general term structure. Stochastic interest rates: arbitrage pricing of bonds, interest rate derivative securities. Prerequisite: MATH 356 or consent of the Department.
MATH 371 Mathematical Modelling in the Life Sciences =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Model development, computation, and analysis for problems in the life sciences. Models include differential equations, difference equations and stochastic formulations. Model evaluation and prediction. Applications are chosen from epidemiology, ecology, population biology, physiology and medicine. Prerequisites: MATH 102, 120, 125, or 127; MATH 209, 214, or 217. No previous computing experience is needed.
MATH 372 Mathematical Modelling I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to develop the students’ problem-solving abilities along heuristic lines and to illustrate the processes of Applied Mathematics. Students will be encouraged to recognize and formulate problems in mathematical terms, solve the resulting mathematical problems and interpret the solution in real world terms. Typical problems considered include nonlinear programming, optimization problems, diffusion models. Prerequisites: MATH 102, 120, 125, or 127; MATH 209, 214, or 217.
MATH 373 Mathematical Programming and Optimization I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to optimization. Problem formulation. Linear programming. The simplex method and its variants (revised Simplex method, dual simplex method). Extreme points of polyhedral sets. Theory of linear inequalities (Farkas Lemma). Complementary slackness and duality. Post-optimality analysis. Interior point methods. Applications (elementary games, transportation problems, networks, etc.). Prerequisites: MATH 102, 120, 125, or 127; MATH 209, 214, or 217.
MATH 381 Numerical Methods I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Approximation of functions by Taylor series, Newton’s formulae, Lagrange and Hermite interpolation. Splines. Orthogonal polynomials and least-squares approximation of functions. Direct and iterative methods for solving linear systems. Methods for solving non-linear equations and systems of non-linear equations. Introduction to computer programming. Prerequisites: MATH 102, 120, 125, or 127; MATH 209, 214, or 217. Note: Credit can be obtained for at most one of MATH 280, 381, CMPUT 340. Note: Extra classes may be held for students lacking a background in one of the major programming languages such as Fortran, C, C++ or Matlab.
MATH 408 Computational Finance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of Monte Carlo methods. Essentials of stochastics. Introduction to financial derivatives pricing. Generating random variables. Simulating stochastic differential equations. Application to financial derivatives pricing and interest rate models. Variance reduction techniques. Prerequisite: STAT 471, or E E 387 and consent of the Department.
MATH 411 Honors Complex Variables =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Complex number system. Analytic functions. Cauchy’s Integral theorem and formula. Applications including the maximum modulus principle, Taylor expansion and Laurent expansion. Harmonic functions. The residue theorem with applications; calculus of residues, argument principle, and Rouche’s theorem. Basics of analytic continuation. Additional topics at the instructor’s discretion such as: Normal families, The Riemann mapping Theorem, Picard’s Theorem. Note: This course is primarily for Honors students in Mathematics or Physics. Offered in alternate years. It may be offered in intervening years if demand is sufficient. Prerequisite: MATH 314 or 317.
MATH 414 Analysis II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Differentiation of maps in Rn, implicit function and mapping theorems, sequences of functions, Riemann-Stielties integration, additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisite: MATH 314. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 317.
MATH 415 Mathematical Finance I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of probability tools for discrete financial analysis; Conditional probabilities/expectations. Filtrations, adapted and predictable processes. Martingales, submartingales and supermartingales in discrete-time. Doob decomposition for supermartingales. Predictable representation. Discrete- time financial modes: Arbitrage, complete and incomplete markets. Self-financing property, value and gain processes. Valuation of contingent claims. Binomial model: Model specifications, Perfect hedging. Utility functions and consumption/ investment problems. European and American options in discrete time. Futures and forward contracts in discrete time. Transition to the continuous-time framework. Corequisite: STAT 471 or consent of the Department.
MATH 417 Honors Real Variables I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Brief review of set operations and countable sets. Measure theory, integration theory, Lebesgue measure and integrals on R^n, product measure, Tonelli-Fubini theorem. Functions of bounded variation, absolutely continuous functions. Prerequisite: MATH 317 or 414 or equivalent.
MATH 418 Honors Real Variables II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classical Banach spaces. Hahn-Banach, open mapping and closed graphs theorems. Hilbert spaces, orthonormal bases. Elements of spectral theory, spectra of compact operators, spectral theorem for compact self-adjoint operators. Prerequisite: MATH 417. Corequisite: MATH 447.
MATH 421 Combinatorics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Permutations and combinations, Binomial Theorem, Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion, recurrence relations, generating functions, orthogonal Latin squares, balanced incomplete block designs, Steiner triple systems, perfect difference sets, Boolean algebra and Finite State Machines. Prerequisites: Either (1) MATH 326 or (2) one of MATH 222 or 228 and a 300-level MATH course, MATH 322 recommended.
MATH 422 Coding Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Elements of group theory, cosets, Lagrange’s theorem, binary group codes, polynomials, finite field theory, error correcting codes. Prerequisites: MATH 228 (or 223, or 128), any 300-level MATH course.
MATH 424 Algebra: Groups and Fields =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Field extensions. Groups of automorphisms of fields. Galois theory. Finite fields and applications. Solvable groups, the insolvability of the quintic equation. Ruler and compass construction. Prerequisite: MATH 326 (or MATH 228 by consent of the instructor) and MATH 328. Note: (1) This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 427 or 329.
MATH 428 Algebra: Advanced Ring Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, and homological algebra. Additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisite: MATH 326 or consent of Department.
MATH 429 Algebra: Advanced Group Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Group actions, Sylow Theory, solvable and nilpotent groups, Galois Theory. Prerequisite: MATH 328 or consent of the Department.
MATH 432 Intermediate Differential Equations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Elementary existence and uniqueness theorems. Systems of equations, stability, perturbation theory. Introduction to numerical methods. Introduction to phase plane analysis. Prerequisite: MATH 334 or 336.
MATH 436 Intermediate Partial Differential Equations I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Partial differential equations as physical models. Introduction to basic generalized functions. Theory of linear and quasi-linear first- order equations: general solution, initial value problem, generalized solutions and propagation of singularities, characteristic surfaces, shock formation. Theory of fully nonlinear first order equations: complete solution and the initial value problem. Hamilton-Jacobi equation and its applications. Second order linear equations in n dimensions: classification, canonical form, characteristic surfaces and shock formation, initial and boundary value problem. Prerequisite: MATH 337.
MATH 438 Intermediate Partial Differential Equations II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Second order equations in n dimension: classification, canonical form, characteristic surfaces. Laplace equation as a representative of the elliptic equation: the mean value theorem, fundamental solutions and Green functions, the boundary value problems. Wave equation as a representative of hyperbolic equations: initial value problems, the d’Alambert formula, the method of descent, propagation of singularities, Duhamel’s principle. Heat equation as a representative of parabolic equations: initial value problems. Introduction to integral transforms: Fourier, Laplace, Hankel transforms. Prerequisite: MATH 337.
MATH 447 Elementary Topology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Set Theory, metric spaces and general topology. Compactness, connectedness. Urysohn’s Lemma and Tietze’s Theorem. Baire Category Theorem. The Tychonoff Theorem. Homotopy and covering spaces. Primarily intended for third and fourth year students with a good background in Mathematics. Prerequisite: MATH 217 or 314. MATH 347 is recommended as a companion course. Offered in alternate years. It may be offered in intervening years if demand is sufficient.
MATH 448 Introduction to Differential Geometry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Riemannian geometry of n-space, metric tensors, various curvature concepts and their relationships, covariant differentiation, geodesics, parallel transport. Additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisites: MATH 348, or MATH 217 and one of MATH 225 or 227. Offered in alternate years. It may be offered in intervening years if demand is sufficient.
MATH 496 Honors Seminar =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended to give students experience with independent reading, and to improve their ability to present and explain mathematical ideas. The course is compulsory for all fourth year Honors students in BSc and BA Mathematics and BSc Applied Mathematics. Normally offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: MATH 317.
MATH 497 Reading in Mathematics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to give credit to mature and able students for reading in areas not covered by courses, under the supervision of a staff member. A student, or group of students, wishing to use this course should find a staff member willing to supervise the proposed reading program. A detailed description of the material to be covered should be submitted to the Chair of the Department Honors Committee. (This should include a description of testing methods to be used.) The program will require the approval of both the Honors Committee, and the Chair of the Department. The students’ mastery of the material of the course will be tested by a written or oral examination. This course may be taken in Fall or Winter and may be taken any number of times, subject always to the approval mentioned above. Prerequisite: Any 300-level MATH course.
MATH 499 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-6). This course provides students in Specialization and Honors programs an opportunity to pursue research in mathematics under the direction of a member of the Department. Course requirements include at least one oral presentation and a written final report. Students interested in taking this course should contact the course coordinator two months in advance. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: a 300-level MATH course and consent of the course coordinator.
Graduate Courses
MATH 505 Stochastic Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Discrete-time stochastic analysis: Stochastic basis, filtration, stochastic sequences. Absolute continuity of probability measures and conditional expectations. Martingale-like and predictable stochastic sequences. Doob’s decomposition. Stopping times and related properties. Uniformly integrable stochastic sequences. Transition from discrete-time to continuous-time stochastic analysis. Introduction to stochastic integration with respect to Brownian motion. Prerequisites: STAT 471 or consent of the Department.
MATH 506 Complex Variables Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A review and some extensions of single variable complex analysis. Complex linearity and holomorphicity in several variables, Hartog’s theorem, Weierstrass preparation theorem, Riemann extension theorem, Weierstrass division theorem, analytic Nullstellensatz, implicit and inverse function theorems, complex manifolds and analytic subvarieties, meromorphic maps. Prerequisite: MATH 411.
MATH 508 Computational Finance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of Monte Carlo methods. Essentials of stochastics. Introduction to financial derivatives pricing. Generating random variables. Simulating stochastic differential equations. Application to financial derivatives pricing and interest rate models. Variance reduction techniques. Prerequisite: STAT 471 or FIN 654 or ECON 598 or consent of the Department. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 408.
MATH 510 Stochastic Analysis II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Continuous semimartingales and quadratic variation. Stochastic integrals for continuous semimartingales. Ito’s formula. Change of probability measure (Girsanov transformation). Martingale representation theorem for Brownian filtrations. Stochastic differential equations, diffusions. Introduction to discontinuous semimartingales with emphasis on Poisson processes. Prerequisites: MATH 505 or consent of the Department.
MATH 512 Algebraic Number Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Valuations and their extensions, ramifications; integral dependence, algebraic number fields, ideals and divisors, class number. Prerequisite: MATH 427.
MATH 515 Mathematical Finance I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of probability tools for discrete financial analysis; Conditional probabilities/expectations. Filtrations, adapted and predictable processes. Martingales, submartingales and supermartingales in discrete-time. Doob decomposition for supermartingales. Predictable representation. Discrete- time financial modes: Arbitrage, complete and incomplete markets. Self-financing property, value and gain processes. Valuation of contingent claims. Binomial model: Model specifications, Perfect hedging. Utility functions and consumption/ investment problems. European and American options in discrete time. Futures and forward contracts in discrete time. Transition to the continuous-time framework. Prerequisite: STAT 471 or consent of the Department. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 415.
MATH 516 Linear Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classical Banach spaces. Hahn-Banach, open mapping and closed graphs theorems. Hilbert spaces, orthonormal bases. Elements of spectral theory, spectra of compact operators, spectral theorem for compact self-adjoint operators. Prerequisite: MATH 417. Corequisite: MATH 447.
MATH 518 Functional Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Locally convex spaces, weak topologies and duality in Banach spaces, weak compactness in Banach spaces, structure of classical Banach spaces, local structures, infinite-dimensional geometry of Banach spaces and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 516. Corequisite: MATH 447 or consent of Department.
MATH 519 Introduction to Operator Algebras Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Banach algebras and spectral theory, compact and Fredholm operators, the spectral theorem for bounded normal operators, operator algebras, representations of C+-algebras, elementary von Neumann algebra theory, and other topics. Prerequisite: MATH 516. Corequisite: MATH 447 or consent of Department.
MATH 520 Mathematical Finance II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Financial markets in continuous-time: Arbitrage, completeness, self-financing strategies. Black Scholes model. Option pricing and hedging: European, American and exotic options. Consumption-investment problem: Utility maximization, optimal portfolio and optimal consumption. Prerequisite: MATH 515. Corequisite: MATH 510 or consent of the Department.
MATH 521 Differential Manifolds Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Finite dimensional manifolds/submanifolds; tangent bundle, differential, inverse, and implicit function theorems, partitions of unity; imbeddings, immersions, submersions; vector fields and associated flows; Lie derivative, Lie bracket; tensor analysis, differential forms, orientation, integration, Stokes’ theorem; basics of smooth bundle theory, Riemannian metrics; notion of a Lie group with basic examples, smooth Lie group actions, principal bundles. Prerequisite: MATH 446 or 448.
MATH 524 Ordinary Differential Equations IIA Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Existence theorems, uniqueness theorems; linear systems (basic theory); stability (basic theory); nonlinear systems (local theory); nonlinear systems (global theory); bifurcations. Prerequisite: MATH 334 or equivalent.
MATH 525 Ordinary Differential Equations IIB Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Asymptotics; boundary value problems; Poincare- Bendixson theory. Additional material will be chosen from among the following topics at the option of the instructor: separation; dichotomies; comparison and oscillation theory; bifurcation theory; nonautonomous systems; dynamical systems; functional differential equations; contingent equations; differential equations in Banach spaces. Prerequisite: MATH 524 or equivalent.
MATH 527 Intermediate Partial Differential Equations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Notions; Elliptic PDE’s; Parabolic PDE’s; Hyperbolic PDE’s; Nonlinear Integrable PDE’s. Prerequisite: MATH 436 or equivalent; corequisite: MATH 516.
MATH 530 Algebraic Topology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Particular background from point set topology (pasting and quotienting constructions); homotopy relation between maps and spaces; fundamental group; Seifert VanKampen theorem; covering spaces. Additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisites: MATH 227, 317 and 447 or consent of Department.
MATH 535 Numerical Methods I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Direct and iterative methods for solving linear systems, iterative methods for nonlinear systems, polynomial and spline interpolations, least square approximation, numerical differentiation and integration, initial value problems for ODE’s (one-step, multistep methods, stiff ODE’s). Prerequisite: 400-level MATH course. Students are required to have knowledge of advanced Calculus and introductory knowledge in Analysis and Linear Algebra and some computer programming. Note 1: Restricted to graduate students only. Note 2: May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MATH 381, 481 or 486 or equivalent.
MATH 536 Numerical Solutions of Partial Differential Equations I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Finite difference and finite element methods for boundary-value problems of elliptic equations. Numerical algorithms for large systems of linear algebraic equations: direct, classical relaxation, multigrid and preconditioned conjugate gradient methods. Algorithms for vector/parallel computers and the domain decomposition method. Prerequisites: MATH 337, 436 or equivalent and some computer programming.
MATH 538 Techniques of Applied Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Asymptotic analysis of integrals: Laplace, stationary phase, and steepest descent methods. Regular and singular perturbations: trained coordinates, multiple scales, asymptotic matching, renormalization techniques, WKB theory, Hamiltonian perturbation theory, center manifolds and stability. Singularities in differential equations. Applications to algebraic, ordinary and partial differential equations. Prerequisite: MATH 438 or equivalent.
MATH 539 Applied Functional Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Linear part:structure of function spaces, Sobolev spaces, embeddings, topologies, linear operators, adjoint and inverse operators, spectra, distributions, semigroup theory, integral equations, well-posedness and the notion of a solution. Nonlinear part: inequalities, Frechet and Gateaux derivatives, fixed point theorems. Applications from mechanics, reaction-diffusion equations, the Navier-Stokes equations, nonlinear Schrödinger equation. Prerequisite: MATH 438 or equivalent.
MATH 542 Fourier Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review, theory and extension of Fourier series for square integrable functions; orthonormal systems, Bessel’s inequality, completeness, Parseval’s identity, Riesz-Fischer Theorem. Extension to Fourier series for functions in other Lebesgue classes; Fejer means, conjugate series, Dirichlet, Fejer and Poisson kernels. Norm convergence; remarks on pointwise convergence. Fourier transforms and series in several dimensions; inverse transform, Plancherel formula, Poisson Formula, maximal functions, Riesz-Thorin Theorem and applications. Elementary distribution theory; D, D’, S, S’ and some elementary results, Fourier transforms of tempered distributions. Examination of some earlier results with tempered distributions instead of functions and getting familiar with basic concepts. Prerequisite: MATH 418.
MATH 543 Measure Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Abstract measures. Integration. Lp spaces. Radon- Nikodym theorem. Hahn and Lebesgue decomposition theorems. Product measures. Fubini’s theorem. Prerequisite: MATH 418.
MATH 556 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals including continuum hypothesis surface tension, classical thermodynamics, and transport phenomena. Introduction to Cartesian tensors. Kinematics of flow including Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions, streamline, path line, streak line, vorticity and circulation. Derivation of the conservation laws for mass, momentum, and energy and a detailed description of the Boussinesq approximation. Conservation laws in a rotating frame. Vortex lines and tubes, role of viscosity in vortices, Kelvin’s circulation theorem, the vorticity equation in nonrotating and rotating frames. Irrotational flow including its relevance, velocity potential, sources and sinks, and flow past various shapes. Gravity waves in deep and shallow water with and without surface tension in both the linear and nonlinear contexts. Dynamic similarity and Buckingham’s Pi Theorem. Prerequisites: One of MATH 311, 411 and MATH 436 or consent of Instructor.
MATH 570 Mathematical Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Mathematical modeling in the biological and medical sciences. Students will learn how to apply mathematical methods and theory to a variety of different biological problems. Topics will be taken from: (i) continuous and discrete dynamical systems describing interacting and structured populations, resource management, biological control, reaction kinetics, biological oscillators and switches, the dynamics of infectious diseases and genetics and (ii) models of spatial processes in biology including random walks, pattern formation in morphogenesis and ecology, applications of traveling waves to population dynamics, epidemiology, chemical reactions, and models for neural patterns. Prerequisites: MATH 524 and a 400 or 500 level course on Partial Differential Equations or consent of Instructor.
MATH 581 Group Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Group actions, Sylow Theory, solvable and nilpotent groups, Galois Theory. Additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisite: MATH 328 or consent of the Department.
MATH 582 Rings and Modules Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, and homological algebra. Additional topics at the discretion of the instructor. Prerequisite: MATH 326 or consent of the Department.
MATH 600 Reading in Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students registered in this course are supervised by individual staff members in areas of interest of the staff members. Students will be allowed to take this course only in exceptional circumstances and with the permission of the Chairman of the Department. This course shall not be counted against the minimum course requirement for graduate students.
MATH 601 Graduate Colloquium Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course can be obtained twice.
MATH 617 Topics in Functional Analysis I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 623 Topics in Differential Geometry and Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 642 Abstract Harmonic Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MATH 519.
MATH 650 Seminar in Algebra Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 651 Seminar in Analysis Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 652 Seminar in Differential Equations Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 653 Seminar in Functional Analysis Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 654 Seminar in Nonlinear Waves/Fluid Mechanics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 655 Topics in Fluid Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 656 Seminar in Mathematical Biology Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this seminar course can be obtained more than once.
MATH 659 Research Seminar in Mathematics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-2s-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
MATH 663 Topics in Applied Mathematics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 664 Topics in Applied Mathematics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 667 Topics in Differential Equations I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 676 Topics in Geometry I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 681 Topics in Algebra Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 682 Topics in Algebra Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MATH 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). Open only to students taking the MSc non- thesis option in mathematics.
#
Mechanical Engineering
MEC E
Department of Mechanical Engineering Faculty of Engineering
The following courses were renumbered effective 2014-2015: Old New
MEC E 553 MEC E 453
MEC E 585 MEC E 485
ENG M 541 MEC E 467
The following courses were renumbered effective 2011-2012 Old New
MEC E 330 MEC E 331
MEC E 370 MEC E 371
Undergraduate Courses
MEC E 200 Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Œ2 (fi 5) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-2s-0). Introduction to the profession of mechanical engineering with special emphasis of industries in Alberta, including coverage of elements of ethics, equity, concepts of sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act. Selected guest speakers on design problems in mechanical engineering. Communication skills including written and oral presentations.
MEC E 230 Introduction to Thermo-Fluid Sciences Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Introduction to modes of heat transfer. One dimensional heat conduction. Heat transfer from surfaces. Introduction to fluid mechanics. Fluid properties. Fluid statics. Use of control volumes. Internal flows. Prerequisites: MATH 101, EN PH 131.
MEC E 250 Engineering Mechanics II Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Moments of inertia. Kinematics and kinetics of rigid body motion, energy and momentum methods, impact, mechanical vibrations. Prerequisites: ENGG 130, EN PH 131 and MATH 101. There is a consolidated exam.
MEC E 260 Mechanical Design I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-0-3). Design morphology, analysis and design of components, mechanical design with electric motors, computer-aided design introduction, design project. Corequisite: MEC E 265 and CIV E 270.
MEC E 265 Engineering Graphics and CAD Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-0-3). Engineering drawing and sketching, conventional drafting, computer-aided drawing in 2D and 3D, solid modelling, and computer-aided design.
MEC E 300 Mechanical Measurements Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Characterization and behavior of measuring systems. Statistics and analysis of measurement data; measurement techniques applied to fundamental mechanical engineering phenomena. Prerequisites: CIV E 270, ECE 209, STAT 235. Corequisite: MEC E 330 or MEC E 331.
MEC E 301 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory I Œ2.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-0-3). Laboratory experiments in mechanical engineering measurement techniques, treatment of measurement data, introduction to engineering report writing. Corequisite: MEC E 300.
MEC E 331 Fluid Mechanics I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). External flow, boundary layers, momentum theories, similitude, fluid metering, fluid friction, fluid friction in pipes, pipe networks. Prerequisites: MEC E 230, 250, MATH 209. Corequisite: CH E 243. Credit can only be granted for one of MEC E 330 or MEC E 331.
MEC E 340 Applied Thermodynamics Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). Review of thermodynamic principles. Applications to gas compressors, vapour and gas power cycles, heat pump cycles. Availability analysis. Psychrometrics. Combustion analysis. Prerequisite: CH E 243.
MEC E 360 Mechanical Design II Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1.5). Design procedures, theories of failure, material selection, design for fatigue, creep and relaxation, selection of gears and bearings and application of computer-aided design software. Prerequisite: MEC E 260 and 265, MAT E 202 and CIV E 270. Corequisite: MEC E 362.
MEC E 362 Mechanics of Machines Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1.5). Velocities and acceleration in plane mechanisms, balancing of rotating and reciprocating machinery, gears and gear trains. Prerequisite: MEC E 250.
MEC E 364 Manufacturing Processes Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-0-3). Primary manufacturing processes including casting, forming, machining, powdered metallurgy and surface technology, interactions between design, materials (metals, polymers, ceramics, composites) and processes, selected field trips and laboratory activities. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: MEC E 260.
MEC E 371 Heat Transfer Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Mechanisms of heat transfer, steady and unsteady heat conduction, numerical analysis, thermal radiation, free and forced convection, heat exchanger analysis and heat transfer with change of phase and mass transfer. Prerequisites: MEC E 230, CH E 243. Corequisites: MATH 300 and MEC E 331. Credit can only be granted for one of MEC E 370 or MEC E 371.
MEC E 380 Advanced Strength of Materials I Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-0). Stress, strain, stress-strain relation, time-independent and time-dependent behavior, virtual work and energy theorems, deformations, indeterminate systems, matrix methods. Prerequisite: MEC E 260 and CIV E 270.
MEC E 390 Numerical Methods of Mechanical Engineers Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). Application of numerical methods to mechanical engineering problems; topics include sources and definitions of error, root finding, solutions of linear and non-linear systems of equations, regression, interpolaton, numerical integration and differentiation, solution of initial value and boundary value ordinary differential equations. Applications include dynamics, solid mechanics, heat transfer and fluid flow. Prerequisites: MATH 102 and 201.
MEC E 403 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory II Œ2.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-0-3). Selected laboratory experiments in applied mechanics and thermosciences. Prerequisites: MEC E 300, 301, 340 and 360.
MEC E 409 Experimental Design Project I Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-0-4). Selected group projects in experimental measurement and mechanical design. Two to four person groups develop planning, design, testing and report writing skills on projects in applied mechanics, thermosciences and engineering management. Prerequisites: MEC E 301 and ENG M 310 or 401.
MEC E 415 Busting Myths with Analysis Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Engineering analysis is used to examine the veracity of commonly held science and technology myths. Prerequisites: MEC E 330 or 331, 340, 370 or 371, 380, 390, MATH 300.
MEC E 420 Feedback Control Design of Dynamic Systems Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3/2). Design of linear feedback control systems for command-following error, stability, and dynamic response specifications. PID, Root-locus, frequency response and design techniques. An introduction to structural design limitations. Examples emphasizing Mechanical Engineering systems. Some use of computer aided design with MATLAB/Simulink. Controls Lab - control of mechanical systems. Prerequisites: MEC E 390. Credit can only be granted for one of MEC E 420, ECE 362, CH E 448.
MEC E 430 Fluid Mechanics II Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Navier-Stokes equations, introductory computational fluid dynamics, boundary layers, compressible fluid flow (variable area ducts, normal and oblique shock waves, Prantdl-Meyer expansions, adiabatic and isothermal pipe flow), two phase flow. Prerequisite: MEC E 330 or 331.
MEC E 443 Energy Conversion Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Sources, flow and overall efficiency of use of various energy forms in society, thermodynamic analysis of energy conversion devices such as thermoelectric and magnetohydrodynamic generators, solar and fuel cells, energy from fission and fusion reactors. Prerequisite: MEC E 340.
MEC E 451 Vibrations and Sound Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1). Free and forced vibration of single degree of freedom systems with and without damping, vibration isolation, free vibration of multi degrees of freedom systems, vibration absorption, beam vibrations, sound waves, sound sources, subjective aspects of noise. Prerequisites: MEC E 250 and MATH 300.
MEC E 453 Acoustics and Noise Control Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Acoustic waves, sound transmission through walls and structures, acoustics of large and small rooms, mechanisms of sound absorption. Design of silencers. Prerequisites: MEC E 250, 330 or 331 and MATH 300. Credit cannot be obtained in both MEC E 553 and 453.
MEC E 460 Design Project Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-1s-4). Feasibility study and detailed design of a project which requires students to exercise creative ability, to make assumptions and decisions based on synthesis of technical knowledge, and in general, devise new designs, rather than analyse existing ones. Prerequisites: MEC E 200, 330 or 331, 340, 360, 362, 370 or 371, 380. Corequisite: ENG M 310 (or ENG M 401).
MEC E 462 Piping Systems Design Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-2s-0). Design of piping systems. The course will focus on water, refrigerant, steam, and speciality piping systems. Equipment selection will be included. Incorporation of plumbing, building, mechanical, NFPA, and ASHRAE codes and standards. Prerequisite: MEC E 330 or 331, or equivalent.
MEC E 463 Thermo-Fluids Systems Design Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2). Design and optimization of thermo-fluid systems, heating and ventilating equipment and load calculations, system design, piping networks, heat exchanger analysis and design, computer- aided design projects. Prerequisites: MEC E 330 or 331, 340, and 370 or 371.
MEC E 464 Design for Manufacture Œ4 (fi 3) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-2s-4). Design of machine components for ease of manufacture. Application of measurement, inspection, and reverse engineering techniques. Preparation of working drawings for manufacturing. Introduction to machining operations, including hands-on machine shop practice. Evaluation of design performance. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: MEC E 260, 265, 300, and 301.
MEC E 466 Building Systems Design Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2). Design and analysis of building systems for maintaining the indoor environment. Design of heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems through load calculations, equipment selection and specification. Prerequisites: MEC E 340, 370 or 371.
MEC E 467 Modelling and Simulation of Engineering Systems Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Modeling and analysis of systems and processes that include technological decision making. Formulation and solution methods for systems including associated resource requirements and other system inputs. Numerical methods for simulation. Projects will involve simulation software to support analysis and design of engineering systems and processes. Prerequisites: MEC E 250 and 390. Note that credit cannot be obtained in both MEC E 467 and ENG M 541.
MEC E 468 Numerical Simulation in Mechanical Engineering Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Computer modelling in mechanical engineering. Simulation of mechanisms. Stress analysis and heat transfer using commercial software. Emphasis is on numerical model design including testing and verification methods, and the critical interpretation of the computed results. Credit cannot be obtained in both MEC E 468 and 568. Prerequisites: MEC E 265, 362, 370 or 371, 380, 390.
MEC E 469 Experimental Design Project II Œ2.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-0-3). Advanced project in experimental measurement and mechanical designs in applied mechanics, thermosciences and engineering management. Prerequisite: MEC E 409.
MEC E 480 Advanced Strength of Materials II Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Special topics for beams, torsion, pressure vessels, plane stress and strain, stability, fracture mechanics. Prerequisites: MEC E 360, 380, MATH 300.
MEC E 485 Biomechanical Modelling of Human Tissues and Systems Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Biomechanics; mechanical characterization of biological tissues using elastic and viscoelastic models. Rheology of blood and flow properties. Static and dynamic analyses of selected physiological systems. Application of biomaterials in external and internal prostheses. Prerequisites: BME 320 and 321; MEC E 300, 362, 380; and MEC E 330 or 331. Credit cannot be obtained in both MEC E 585 and 485.
MEC E 494 Introduction to Research Œ0.5 (fi 2) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-1s-0). Introduction to methods of mechanical engineering research. Organizational seminars for the research project in the following term. Prerequisites: MEC E 330, 380, and consent of Department.
MEC E 495 Research Project Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-0-6). Mechanical Engineering undergraduate research project with a faculty member. Prerequisites: MEC E 494 and consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
Note: The courses ENG M 620, MEC E 630, 640, 670, 680 and 681 normally will be offered annually. Other courses will be offered on a lecture basis when there is sufficient enrolment; otherwise they will be offered on a guided reading basis.
MEC E 537 Aerodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Boundary layer flow, vorticity, circulation and aerodynamic lift, wing theory, aeronautical applications. Prerequisite: MEC E 330 or 331.
MEC E 539 Applied Computational Fluid Dynamics Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Model selection and simplification, grid generation and grid independence, transient and advection terms treatment, turbulence modeling, verification and validation, best practices. Hands-on experience with commercial CFD codes to demonstrate the application of: theory, proper setup and analysis. Prerequisites: MEC E 390, and 330 or equivalent.
MEC E 541 Combustion Engines Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). History of basic cycles, combustion theory including ignition flame propagation and engine knock, cycle analysis with deviations from ideal cycles and performance characteristics, fuels, design and operation of carburation and injection processes, exhaust emissions measurements. Identification of design parameters and their effect on emissions. Prerequisite: MEC E 340.
MEC E 563 Finite Element Method for Mechanical Engineering Œ4.5 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Application of finite element methods to mechanical engineering problems; topics include direct stiffness methods, assembly, constraints, solution techniques, post-processing, element types and the Galkerin procedure. Applications include beam truss and frame analysis, plane strain and stress problems, heat transfer and dynamic analysis Prerequisites: MATH 300, MEC E 360, 390.
MEC E 564 Design and Simulation of Micro-Electromechanical Systems (MEMS) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Overview of micro-systems, common micro-systems and their working principles, mechanical modeling and simulation of MEMS, scaling laws in miniaturization, material for MEMS and micro-systems, mechanical design of micro devices, mechanical packaging of micro devices, overview on micro-systems fabrication processes. Corequisite: MEC E 563 or equivalent.
MEC E 569 Mechanics and Design of Composite Materials Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Introduction to composite materials. Mechanical characterization and strength theories of a lamina. Micro-mechanical analysis of a lamina. Macro-mechanical analysis of laminates. Failure analysis and design of laminates. Prerequisite: MEC E 380.
MEC E 606 Photonics Measurement Systems in Fluid Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of optics and optoelectronics for applications in measurement systems used in fluid mechanics including PIV, PLIF, LDA, and particle sizing. Design and development of measurement systems. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
MEC E 607 Optical-Mechanical Sensing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Light propagation in media; thermal and mechanical perturbations to media and effects on light propagation; topics in photo-elasticity including the relationships between stress/strain and optical properties, birefringence and polarization; waveguides and common structures in opto-mechanical sensing systems including waveguide interferometers, intensity modulators, Bragg structures; strain-optic models used in analyzing micro-optical mechanical systems. Coverage of application areas: structural health monitoring, biomedical technologies, diagnostics.
MEC E 615 Control Methods Applied to Partial Differential Equations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to control methods applied to systems governed by partial differential equations. The focus will be on fluid and solid mechanics applications with boundary actuation.
MEC E 618 Modeling, Analysis and Control of Biomedical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Empirical and physiology-based models, system identification, static and dynamic stability analysis, use of control and systems principles in analysis and interpretation of biomedical systems and processes with applications to design of biomedical control systems.
MEC E 620 Combustion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Chemical reactions, chemical equilibrium and flame temperatures. Flame propagation and explosion theories. Detonations. Air pollution from combustion sources.
MEC E 630 Fluid Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Kinematics of fluid motion, fundamental fluid equations and concepts, laminar boundary layers, potential flow, stability and transition, introduction to turbulence.
MEC E 632 Turbulent Fluid Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Governing equations of turbulent flow. Statistical and phenomenological theories of turbulent transport of momentum, heat and mass in wall-bounded and free flows. Computational techniques, empirical data and applications. Prerequisite: MEC E 630 or equivalent or consent of Instructor.
MEC E 633 Particle Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Microparticle terminology and definitions, synthesis of structured microparticles, analytical methods for micro- and nanoparticles, applications of particle engineering.
MEC E 634 Aerosol Science and Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to aerosol science. Particle size statistics. Particle motion: Stokes law, Brownian motion, and thermophoresis. Particle coagulation, condensation, evaporation, and nucleation. Particle electrical and optical properties. Aerosol measurement techniques.
MEC E 635 Mechanics of Respiratory Drug Delivery Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to pharmaceutical aerosol delivery to the lung. Particle size distributions. Motion of a single aerosol particle in a fluid. Particle size changes due to evaporation or condensation. Fluid dynamics and particle deposition in the respiratory tract. Jet nebulizers. Dry powder inhalers. Metered dose propellant inhalers. Prerequisite: MEC E 330 or 331 or equivalent or consent of Instructor.
MEC E 636 Environmental Fluid Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Transport of passive and active scalars. Plumes and environmental convection with applications to air pollution. Gravity currents and intrusions. Surface gravity waves. Flow in porous media. Darcy’s law with applications to groundwater flow and oil recovery. Turbulent boundary layers in the natural environment.
MEC E 637 Colloidal Hydrodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Colloidal Systems; Colloidal Interactions; Hydrodynamics; Analysis of Complex Fluid flows; Thin Films; Flow in Porous Media; Microfluidics; Selected applications: Coagulation, flocculation and particle deposition; Sedimentation; Separation technologies such as deep bed filtration, membrane filtration, and chromatography; Microfluidic applications involving complex fluids; Colloid applications involving complex fluids; Colloid facilitated transport. Prerequisite/Corequisite; MEC E 430, 630, or approval of instructor.
MEC E 638 Vortex Flows Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Vortex dynamics approach to large-scale structures in turbulent flows. Vortex motion equations, conservation laws, and modelling using discrete vortices. Prerequisite: a senior undergraduate course in fluid mechanics or consent of Instructor.
MEC E 639 Computational Fluid Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Computational fluid dynamics methods for incompressible and compressible fluids. Model development, discretization methods, and topics on advanced coding, e.g., high performance computing, and parallelism, will be covered.
MEC E 640 Analytical Thermodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Postulatory approach to thermodynamics, equilibrium and maximum entropy principles, fundamental equations, Legendre transformation, Maxwell relations, calculation of property changes, thermodynamics of elastic systems, rubber elasticity, and surface thermodynamics. Prerequisite: MEC E 340 or consent of Instructor.
MEC E 643 Renewable Energy Engineering and Sustainability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of renewable energy systems such as solar, wind, tidal, biomass, geothermal, and fuel cells. Environmental aspects of implementation of renewable energy e.g. hydro and nuclear energy sources. Energy conservation and conventional fossil fuel sources. New technologies and trends in renewable energy. Concept of sustainability and sustainable design for energy systems. Elementary economics of implementation of renewable energy sources and related policy and social issues. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.
MEC E 644 Polymeric and Composite Nanofibers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formation, characterization, modelling and applications of polymeric and composite nanofibers. Emphasis on nanofibers produced using electrospinning.
MEC E 645 Transport and Kinetic Processes in Electrochemical Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the thermodynamics of electrochemical systems such as batteries and fuel cells. Analysis of the main physical process in electrochemical systems: electrode kinetics, mass transport, and charge transport. Introduction to fuel cells and fuel cell systems.
MEC E 650 Analytical Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principle of virtual work; Lagrange’s equations of motion for holonomic and non-holonomic systems; Hamilton’s principle; application to gyroscopes, stabilizers, etc.
MEC E 651 Advanced Robotics: Analysis and Control Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to advanced robotics including mobile robots, redundant manipulators, walking robots, aerial and marine autonomous vehicles. Kinematic and dynamic models for advanced robots. Linear and nonlinear control theory overview with applications to advanced robots.
MEC E 653 Signal Processing of Time and Spectral Series Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical application of processing techniques to the measurement, filtering and analysis of mechanical system signals; topics include: signal classification, A/D conversion, spectral analysis, digital filtering and real-time signal processing.
MEC E 656 Wave Propagation in Structures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to advanced structures, dynamic elasticity equations and concepts, wave propagation in flexural structures, active control of wave propagation and vibration.
MEC E 662 Introduction to Polymer Microfabrication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Microfabrication technologies, MEMS and microfluidics using polymers and plastics, introduction to soft-lithography, choosing polymers for microfabricated products, functional polymers and composites, characterization and testing of microstructured polymers, packaging and bonding of polymers.
MEC E 663 Theory and Applications of Finite Element Method Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction of the basic theory and applications of the finite element method. Applications will focus on linear partial differential equations in solid mechanics, fluid mechanics and thermal science.
MEC E 664 Advanced Design and Simulation of Micro and Nano Electromechanical Sensors (MEMS/NEMS) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced topics dealing with MEMS technologies, transduction mechanisms, and microfabricated sensors and actuators. Sensors for acceleration, rotation rate, pressure, and different micro actuators. MEMS in microfluidics and biomedical applications. Chemical, gas, and biosensors. Prerequisite: MEC E 563 and consent of Instructor. Not open to students with credit in MEC E 564.
MEC E 668 Design of Experiments in Mechanical Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to Experimental Design, with particular emphasis on mechanical engineering. Randomized factorial and fractional factorial experiments. Fitting regression models and optimization. Applications to analytical and computer models.
MEC E 669 Multifunctional Polymer-Based Composites Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Multifunctional Polymer-based Composites (MFPC) manufacturing processes, micro- and nanoscale characterization; Modeling strategies for MFPC properties (continuum, atomistic, multiscale); Characteristics and synergistic effects of MFPC with hard and soft inclusions; Modeling, characterization and properties of MFPC with electrically conductive fillers, for enhanced thermal conductivity, with magnetic properties, for EMF shielding/ reflection, with increased diffusion barrier properties. Prerequisites: MEC E 563, 569 or consent of instructor.
MEC E 671 Heat Conduction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Formulation of the basic governing equations in rectangular, cylindrical and spherical coordinates. Consideration of linear and nonlinear problems. Topics include: conduction with energy generation, transpiration cooling, conduction in non-stationary systems, phase transformation, and heat transfer in living tissue. Exact analytic solutions. Application of the integral method and perturbation solutions. Prerequisites: MEC E 370 or 371 and MATH 300, or equivalent.
MEC E 673 Heat Convection Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Conservation equations for mass, momentum and energy. Laminar and turbulent convection boundary layers. Free and forced convection. Convection with phase change. Heat convection in porous media. Microchannel heat transfer. Approximate solutions. Prerequisites: MEC E 370, 330 or 331, and MATH 300, or equivalent.
MEC E 680 Continuum Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to cartesian tensor algebra and calculus; analysis of finite deformation and kinematics of motion; transport theorems and balance laws; analysis of stress; continuum thermodynamics, constitutive equations and material symmetry with application to solids and fluids.
MEC E 681 Elasticity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Extension, torsion and flexure of beams; two- dimensional problems; complex variable methods; integral transform methods; variational methods.
MEC E 682 Nanomechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Surface forces, van der Waals forces, electrostatic forces, Poisson-Boltzmann equation, capillary forces, adhesion contact mechanics, surface energy, tip-surface interaction, adhesion of micro-cantilevers, microbeam arrays, carbon nanotubes, dissipation in MEMS/NEMS, fluid flow with slip, mechanical models for cells, biomembranes, cellular filaments, microtubules, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. Prerequisite: MEC E 380 or consent of instructor.
MEC E 683 Statistical Mechanics with Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of classical mechanics and thermodynamics concepts; introduction to principles of statistical mechanics; concepts of ensembles and ensemble average; probability function and partition function in different ensembles; calculation of thermodynamic quantities from statistical mechanics; applications to polymer elasticity, cell mechanics, fracture mechanics and theories of electrolytic solutions; Monte-Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulations in different ensembles. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
MEC E 685 Macro Fracture Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic concepts of linear and nonlinear fracture mechanics: linear and nonlinear stationary crack-tip stress, strain and displacement fields; energy balance and energy release rates; fracture resistance concepts- static and dynamic fracture toughness; criteria for crack growth; fracture control methodology and applications.
MEC E 690 Analytical Techniques in Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Methods of applied mathematics with particular emphasis on the analysis of analytical models arising in engineering science. At least three topics will be covered from the following: well-posedness of mathematical models in engineering science; generalized functions with applications to the solution of initial and boundary value problems; complex variable analysis with applications to partial differential equations; asymptotic analysis; calculus of variations; integral equations with applications; introductory functional analysis with applications.
MEC E 692 Fundamentals of Engineering Numerical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interpolation, numerical differentiation (finite differences), numerical integration, numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, numerical solution of partial differential equations, discrete transform methods.
MEC E 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). Detailed Engineering report in the student’s major area of interest.
MEC E 910 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). Detailed Engineering Report in the student’s major area of interest.
#
Medical Genetics
MDGEN
Department of Medical Genetics Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Graduate Courses
MDGEN 601 Selected Topics in Medical Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A directed reading and seminar course based on papers taken from the recent literature of medical genetics. The course consists of lectures on a specific topic in medical genetics and oral presentations of the current literature by students. Selected topics vary so that students may take the same course but examining a different topic for additional credit. Prerequisite: consent of the Department of Medical Genetics.
MDGEN 602 Special Topics in Medical Genetics Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This course is designed as a journal club and discussion group in which topics in medical genetics are discussed. Students will critically discuss papers and give oral presentations to the class. Specific topics will include research in genomics, disease gene cloning, chromosome structure, and clinical aspects of medical genetics. Prerequisite: consent of the Department of Medical Genetics.
MDGEN 605 Directed Reading in Medical Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading and study of a specific topic related to the student’s MSc or PhD Program in the Department of Medical Genetics under the direction of one or more faculty members. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
#
Medical Laboratory Science
MLSCI
Division of Medical Laboratory Science Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Notes
(1) See also INT D 409 and 491 for courses offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
(2) MLSCI 320, 330, 340, 350, 360, and 370 are to be taken as a unit over a 37- week period. They are open to students of Medical Laboratory Science only or by special permission of the Division.
Undergraduate Courses
MLSCI 200 Transition to Clinical Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, clinical rotation). Self development of requisite skills and abilities for medical laboratory professionals. There will be emphasis on client centered approaches, preanalytical issues, quality assurance systems, sample procurement, and other laboratory skills.
MLSCI 230 Hematology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-6). An introduction to the theory and practise of hematology, this course will include the morphology, structure, and function of red cells, white cells, and platelets, malignant and benign conditions that affect each cell type, and tests to distinguish among disease states including anemia and leukemia. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 231 Hematology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course is designed for students who are excused from the laboratory component of the normal MLSCI course. An introduction to the theory and practise of hematology, this course will include the morphology, structure, and function of red cells, white cells, and platelets, malignant and benign conditions that affect each cell type, and tests to distinguish among disease states including anemia and leukaemia. Prerequisite: RT (CSMLS) certification or consent of Department. Credit granted for only one of MLSCI 230 or 231.
MLSCI 235 Hemostasis Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 3-0-6 in 4 weeks). Four weeks. This course will present the theory and practice of hemostasis. Topics include the vascular, platelet, clotting factor, fibrinolytic, and inhibitor systems: coagulation disorders; tests that identify factor deficiencies, monitor anticoagulant therapy, and assess thrombolytic states; disorders of hemostasis. Prerequisite: MLSCI 230 or consent of Department. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 236 Hemostasis Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 3-0-0 in 4 weeks). Four weeks. This course is designed for students who are excused from the laboratory component of the normal MLSCI course. This course will present the theory and practice of hemostasis. Topics include the vascular, platelet, clotting factor, fibrinolytic and inhibitor systems: coagulation disorders; tests that identify factor deficiencies, monitor anticoagulant therapy, and assess thrombolytic states; disorders of hemostasis. Prerequisite: MLSCI 230 or consent of Department. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 242 Pathogenic Microbiology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). As an introduction to clinical immunology and bacteriology, this course considers the most common and notorious pathogenic bacteria and the fundamentals of the human immune response that are critical to our health. The lecture portion of the course will focus on microbial pathogenic mechanisms and ways these pathogens get established and avoid destruction by the immune response. The laboratory portion of the course will focus on diagnostic procedures, such as isolation and characterization of these pathogenic microorganisms. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students. May not be taken for credit if credit already received in MMID 240 or MMI 240 or MLSCI 240.
MLSCI 243 Pathogenic Microbiology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-4). Continuation to the introduction to Pathogenic Microbiology I, this course considers the most common and notorious pathogenic anaerobic bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites in human disease. The lecture portion of the course will focus on pathogenic mechanisms and ways these pathogens get established and avoid destruction by the immune response. The course will also cover the mechanisms of antimicrobial action. The laboratory portion of the course will focus on diagnostic procedures, such as isolation and characterization of these pathogens. Prerequisite: MLSCI 242. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students. May not be taken for credit if credit already received in MMID 240 or MMI 240 or MLSCI 240.
MLSCI 244 Pathogenic Microbiology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). As an introduction to clinical immunology and bacteriology, this course considers the most common and notorious pathogenic bacteria and the fundamentals of the human immune response that are critical to our health. The lecture portion of the course will focus on microbial pathogenic mechanisms and ways these pathogens get established and avoid destruction by the immune response. Prerequisite: CSMLS general certification or consent of the department. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in MMID 241 or MMI 241 or MLSCI 241.
MLSCI 245 Pathogenic Microbiology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Continuation to the introduction to Pathogenic Microbiology I, this course considers the most common and notorious pathogenic anaerobic bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites in human disease. The lecture portion of the course will focus on pathogenic mechanisms and ways these pathogens get established and avoid destruction by the immune response. The course will also cover the mechanisms of antimicrobial action. Prerequisite: MLSCI 244 and CSMLS general certification or consent of the department. May not be taken for credit if credit already received in MMID 241 or MMI 241 or MLSCI 241.
MLSCI 250 Human Histology and Histotechnology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-4). This course is primarily designed to provide an understanding of human histology and of the techniques used in its study. It will also include, in part, basic pathology (including the nature of malignant disease) and the application of histological and histochemical techniques to demonstrate the diagnostic features of human disease processes. The goal of the course is for students to understand the structure and functions of the cell, and the components and functions of organ systems. The course will also teach students to recognize human tissues at the light and electron microscopical levels. Lectures will be used to illustrate basic principles, and the ability to recognize tissues and organ systems will be acquired in the laboratory. Students will be expected to acquire a detailed knowledge of the subject both from a theoretical and practical level. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students or consent of Department.
MLSCI 262 Clinical Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). This course considers how the analysis of samples from the body for various constituents can give insight into pathological processes. Included are the principles for tests routinely carried out in a clinical biochemistry laboratory, and the biological understanding of test results. Specific subjects considered are carbohydrates, renal function, blood proteins and electrolytes, and acid-base balance. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 263 Clinical Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This course considers how the analysis of samples from the body for various constituents can give insight into pathological processes. Included are the principles for tests routinely carried out in a clinical biochemistry laboratory, and the biological understanding of test results. Specific subjects considered are clinical enzymology, heme catabolism, liver function toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring principles of immunoassays, blood lipids porphyrins, endocrinology, gastric and GI function, fetal-placental function, and biochemical tumor markers. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 264 Clinical Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course considers how the analysis of samples from the body for various constituents can give insight into pathological processes. Included are the principles for tests routinely carried out in a clinical biochemistry laboratory, and the biological understanding of test results. Specific subjects considered are carbohydrates, renal function, blood proteins and electrolytes, and acid-base balance. Prerequisites for non-Medical Laboratory Science students only: CHEM 101, 161, 163 and BIOL 107. Credit granted for only one of MLSCI 262 or 264.
MLSCI 265 Clinical Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course considers how the analysis of samples from the body for various constituents can give insight into pathological processes. Included are the principles for tests routinely carried out in a clinical biochemistry laboratory, and the biological understanding of test results. Specific subjects considered are clinical enzymology, heme catabolism, liver function, toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring, principles of immunoassays, blood lipids, porphyrins, endocrinology, gastric and Gl function, fetal-placental function, and biochemical tumor markers. Prerequisites for non-Medical Laboratory Science students only: MLSCI 264. Credit granted for only one of MLSCI 263 or 265.
MLSCI 270 Transfusion Science Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 3-0-6 in 9 weeks). Nine weeks. This course will present the theory and practice of transfusion science. Topics covered include the genetics of blood groups pretransfusion testing, blood donation and component therapy, adverse effects of transfusion, hemolytic disease of the newborn, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia Prerequisite: MLSCI 230 or consent of Department. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 271 Transfusion Science Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 3-0-0 in 9 weeks). Nine weeks. This course is designed for students who are excused from the laboratory component of the normal MLSCI course. This course will present the theory and practice of transfusion science. Topics covered include the genetics of blood groups, or pretransfusion testing, blood donation and component therapy, adverse effects of transfusion, hemolytic disease of the newborn, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Prerequisite; MLSCl 230 or consent of Department. Restricted to Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 320 Analysis and Communication of Biomedical Information Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1-0-2). Lectures, seminars, and assignments address the following components of writing a literature review: library searches, critical analysis, organizing, writing and editing. Speaking skills are developed through oral presentation of case studies. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
MLSCI 330 Clinical Hematology Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, clinical rotation). As a part of a clinical laboratory education for Medical Laboratory Science students, this course will provide experience in a modern hospital hematology laboratory along with weekly tutorials followed by comprehensive theoretical and practical examinations.
MLSCI 340 Clinical Microbiology Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, clinical rotation). As a part of a clinical laboratory education for Medical Laboratory Science students, this course will provide experience in a modern hospital microbiology laboratory along with weekly tutorials followed by comprehensive theoretical and practical examinations.
MLSCI 350 Histopathology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, clinical rotation). As a part of a clinical laboratory education for Medical Laboratory Science students, this course will provide experience in a modern hospital histopathology laboratory along with weekly tutorials followed by comprehensive theoretical and practical examinations.
MLSCI 360 Clinical Biochemistry Œ5 (fi 10) (two term, clinical rotation). As a part of a clinical laboratory education for Medical Laboratory Science students, this course will provide experience in a modern hospital clinical biochemistry laboratory along with weekly tutorials followed by comprehensive theoretical and practical examinations.
MLSCI 370 Transfusion Science Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, clinical rotation). As a part of a clinical laboratory education for Medical Laboratory Science students, this course will provide experience in a modern hospital transfusion service laboratory, along with weekly tutorials, followed by comprehensive theoretical and practical examinations.
MLSCI 409 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-6). Directed research in a medical laboratory science. Supervisor and research project to be chosen by student. Requires writing a project proposal, keeping an accurate laboratory notebook, conducting adequate experimental research, writing a research paper and presenting a short seminar based on the research. Restricted to fourth-year Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 410 Introduction to Clinical Laboratory Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the principles of management as they apply to clinical laboratories. Subject matter will include healthcare funding and allocation of funds, the management process in small and large clinical laboratories, performance appraisals, ethics and setting priorities for laboratory services. Prerequisite: consent of Division.
MLSCI 420 Emerging Trends in Medical Laboratory Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine the evolution of the Medical Laboratory Science from its inception to its current position within a complex healthcare system. After exploring the origins of the profession and the social and political forces that have shaped it, the focus will shift to the present day and possible future directions, drawing on examples and learnings from current literature. Prerequisites: consent of Division.
MLSCI 430 Advanced Hematology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to enhance the student’s ability to assimilate new and specialized knowledge in an evolving hematology discipline. As such, the course content will change from year to year. Consent of Division is required for non-Medical Laboratory Science students.
MLSCI 460 Clinical Biochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Advanced lectures on specialized topics including diagnostic enzymology, blood lipids, transplantation biochemistry, hormone receptors and protein purification. Other topics will be considered through studies of case reports. A term paper is a requirement for this course. Prerequisite: BIOCH 200 and 330 or equivalents and consent of Division.
MLSCI 466 Applied Toxicology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A consideration of the protocols and their rationale used in a large toxicology laboratory. Topics include analytical, environmental, regulatory, and inhalation toxicology; clinical and forensic toxicology; and doping related to sports. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 and 330 or equivalents and consent of Division.
MLSCI 475 Clinical Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of basic immunology concepts to disease and transplantation, and their monitoring by the clinical laboratory. Topics include the cellular and humoral immune responses, human immune development, immunology and cancer, immune deficiency, autoimmune disease, immunopathology, and transplant immunology. Prerequisite: IMIN 371 or equivalent and consent of Division.
MLSCI 480 Molecular Genetic Approaches to the Study and Diagnosis of Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on the application of techniques of molecular genetics to the practice of Medicine. General subject areas include: organization of the genome, techniques of molecular genetics and their application to medicine, molecular genetics and oncology, and ethical issues involving these techniques as applied to medicine. Prerequisites: Genetics and BIOCH 200 and 330 or equivalents and consent of Division.
MLSCI 481 Techniques in Molecular Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-5). A laboratory course emphasizing introductory and advanced techniques in molecular biology. Isolation of RNA, Northern blotting, construction of cDNA, amplification of DNA by the polymerase chain reaction, analysis of DNA by restriction digestion, transfection of eukaryotic cells for protein expression and Western blot analysis. Corequisite: MLSCI 480 or consent of Department. This course is designed for senior undergraduate students. Credit may only be obtained in one of MLSCI 481 or LABMP 581.
MLSCI 491 Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research in a medical laboratory science. Supervisor and research project to be chosen by student. Requires writing a project proposal, keeping an accurate laboratory notebook, conducting adequate experimental research, writing a research paper and presenting a short seminar based on the research. Restricted to fourth-year Medical Laboratory Science students.
#
Medical Microbiology and Immunology
MMI
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Note: See also the IMIN listings for the following courses offered by more than one department or faculty which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline, specifically: IMIN 200, 324, 371, 372, and 452 (courses in immunology and infection); and INT D 409 and 491 (research project courses for medical laboratory science students).
Undergraduate Courses
MMI 100 Microbes in the News Œ3 (fi 6) (second term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will introduce students to pathogens (viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites), the immune systems that have co-evolved to deal with these threats, and related topics such as vaccination and antibiotic resistance. This course is designed for individuals with little or no background in the biological sciences. Students from the Faculty of Science may not take this course for credit. Students in other programs should consult their program advisor to determine whether this course can be taken for credit.
MMI 133 Medical Microbiology for Health Care Professionals =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory course in medical microbiology designed for students enrolled in health care related programs. The course begins with basic information on microorganisms (bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and prions), the immune system, infection control, transmission of infection, epidemiology, antimicrobials, disinfection and sterilization. The later part of the course concentrates on infectious diseases caused by pathogenic organisms. Nursing students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in their program.
MMI 351 Bacterial Pathogenesis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Medically important bacteria, how they cause disease and the body’s immune response to bacteria. Lectures will systematically discuss the organisms and describe their distinctive as well as their common features of structure and pathogenicity. Prerequisites: MICRB 265 and IMIN 200. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in MLSCI 242 or 243.
MMI 352 Microbial Pathogenesis Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-4). This laboratory course will emphasize development of skills and knowledge for the safe handling of infectious microorganisms and will examine some of the molecular mechanisms of microbial virulence. Prerequisite or corequisite: MMI 351 or MLSCI 242 and 243 or consent of the Department.
MMI 391 Current Methods in Molecular Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-8). This laboratory course will introduce the student to common techniques in molecular biology. Through a series of experiments, students will clone and express the genes for bioluminescence from the light- emitting bacterium Vibrio fischeri. Technical skills will include: preparation and quantification of genomic and plasmid DNAs, screening a genomic library, restriction mapping, amplification of DNA fragments using the polymerase chain reaction, Southern blotting, expression and purification of proteins, and detection of proteins by Western blotting. Prerequisites: IMIN 200 and departmental consent. Priority given to Honors students in the IMIN program. Credit may be obtained for only one of BIOL 391, IMIN 391 or MMI 391.
MMI 405 Advanced Microbial Pathogenicity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on concepts and mechanisms of microbial pathogenesis by discussing a combination of classic and current papers. Essentially a paper dissection course, emphasis will be on experimental approaches, their strengths and limitations. Student-run seminars will be used to facilitate interactive learning. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 and MMI 351 or MLSCI 242 or 243 or consent of the Department.
MMI 415 Advanced Viral Pathogenesis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Mechanisms of viral pathogenesis, with an emphasis on how different viruses modulate the innate and adaptive immune systems to their advantage to avoid detection and elimination and the relevance of viruses in oncogenesis. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200, IMIN 324 and IMIN 371, or consent of Department.
MMI 426 Medical Parasitology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A survey of the protozoan and metazoan parasites of man. Emphasis will be placed on biology, epidemiology, clinical presentation and methods for detection and identification, as well as global impact of parasitic diseases in today’s world. Prerequisite: MLSCI 242 and MLSCI 243 or IMIN 200 or consent of Department.
MMI 436 Inflammation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce the student to inflammation and its role in a range of diseases. An overview is provided on acute and chronic inflammation, inflammatory cells (neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, mast cells, and structural cells), inflammatory mediators, asthma and allergy, and the danger hypothesis in association with the inflammasome. The syllabus includes a mix of lectures and current topic discussions for students to present recent advances in inflammation. Prerequisites: IMIN 371 or instructor consent.
MMI 445 Clinical Microbiology and Human Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on the interactions between clinically relevant microorganisms and the host. Topics include important issues and contemporary problems in clinical microbiology regarding infectious diseases relevant to health care. Aspects that will be studied are: pathogenesis, epidemiology, immune responses, treatment and infection control. Recent advances in vaccines, laboratory diagnosis and techniques will be included. Prerequisites: MMI 133, or MLSCI 242 and MLSCI 243, or IMIN 200, or consent of department.
MMI 490 Advanced Techniques in Microbiology and Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). This lab-based course will introduce students to advanced molecular techniques for the examination of host-microbial interactions. Students will be introduced to the principles and applications of molecular and diagnostic techniques for the characterization of interactions between host cells and microbial pathogens. Key techniques include flow cytometry, fluorescence imaging, high-throughput RNA interference assays and high-content imaging. Prerequisites: IMIN 200 and IMIN 371.
MMI 498 Research Project in Infection and Immunity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Directed research on a specific topic in medical microbiology or immunology in the laboratory of an academic staff member associated with MMI. Can be taken for credit more than once. An oral presentation on the research project is required for completion of the course. Pre- or corequisites: IMIN 324 or 371 or 452 or MMI 351 and/or consent of Department.
MMI 499 Independent Research in Infection and Immunity Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Directed research project on a specific topic in medical microbiology or immunology in the laboratory of an academic staff member associated with MMI. An oral presentation and a written report on the research project is required for completion of the course. Pre- or corequisites: IMIN 324 or 371 or 452 or MMI 351 and/or consent of the Department.
Graduate Courses
MMI 501 Seminar in Medical Microbiology and Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 1.5-1s-0). The objective of this course is to develop skills in critical analysis of research in the fields of microbial pathogenesis and the immune system through facilitated dissection of selected recent publications. Discussion will focus on developing hypothesis, evaluating experimental design and interpretation of results, and formulating future directions. Students will present a paper to the department and receive feedback. Required course. Open to graduate students in Medical Microbiology and Immunology only.
MMI 505 Advanced Microbial Pathogenicity Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on concepts and mechanisms of microbial pathogenesis by discussing a combination of classic and current papers. Essentially a paper dissection course, emphasis will be on experimental approaches, their strengths and limitations. Student-run seminars will be used to facilitate interactive learning. Lectures and seminars are the same as for MMI 405 but there will be an additional requirement of a written research proposal. This course may not be taken if credit has already been obtained in MMI 405. Consent of Department required.
MMI 510 Informatics for Molecular Biologists Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). This course will introduce the student to common and advanced methods in bioinformatics. In lectures and hands-on computer sessions, the student will solve realistic biological questions in the areas of sequence analysis, distant homology detection, phylogeny, correlation of sequence to structure, protein structure analysis, and genomics. While the student will obtain a thorough understanding of bioinformatics methods, the focus is on application of methods in the context of molecular biology research rather than on details of algorithms or computer programming. As a final assignment students will write a mini-proposal for a molecular biology research project that incorporates a series of bioinformatics studies to complement and guide the experimental work. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in IMIN 410. Prerequisites: departmental consent. Priority given to MMI graduate students.
MMI 512 Special Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3).
MMI 515 Advanced Viral Pathogenesis Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Mechanisms of viral pathogenesis, with an emphasis on how different viruses modulate the innate and adaptive immune systems to their advantage to avoid detection and elimination and the relevance of viruses in oncogenesis. Lectures are the same as MMI 415 but there will be an additional requirement of a written oral presentation on a research topic for this course. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MMI 415. Consent of Department required.
MMI 526 Medical Parasitology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A survey of the protozoan and metazoan diseases of man. Emphasis will be placed on biology, epidemiology, clinical presentation and methods for detection and identification as well as global impact of parasitic diseases in today’s world. Lectures and laboratories are the same as MMI 426, but there will be an additional requirement for a written literature review/discussion paper on recent developments or controversies in the field of parasitology. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MMI 426. Consent of Department required.
MMI 545 Clinical Microbiology and Human Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course will focus on the interactions between clinically relevant microorganisms and the host. Topics include important issues and contemporary problems in clinical microbiology regarding infectious diseases relevant to health care. Aspects that will be studied are: pathogenesis, epidemiology, immune responses, treatment and infection control. Recent advances in vaccines, laboratory diagnosis and techniques will be included. Lectures are the same as for MMI 445, but there will be an additional assignment for MMI 545. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MMI 445. Consent of Department required.
MMI 552 Advanced Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). A lecture course on the detailed mechanisms of the immune system, describing recent discoveries in cellular and molecular immunology. Topics include the mechanism of T-cell receptor selection, antigen processing, activation of B and T lymphocytes, cellular collaboration, negative and positive regulatory mechanisms in immunity, transplantation, cytokine actions and interactions. Interaction between immune systems and pathogens, and immunogenetics. Lectures are the same as IMIN 452, but there will be an additional requirement of a written paper to evaluate a current controversy in immunology. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained for INT D 452 or IMIN 452. Consent of Department required.
MMI 590 Advanced Techniques in Microbiology and Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-8). This lab-based course will introduce students to advanced molecular techniques for the examination of host-microbial interactions. Students will be introduced to the principles and applications of molecular and diagnostic techniques for the characterization of interactions between host cells and microbial pathogens. Key techniques include flow cytometry, fluorescence imaging, high-throughput RNA interference assays and high-content imaging. Upon completion, students will be required to design a proposal for the integration of course techniques with their thesis research projects. Prerequisite: consent of department. Credit cannot be given for 590 if students have already received credit for 490.
MMI 605 Current Topics in Infection and Immunity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4s-0). Selected topics in infections and immunity are explored in depth through evaluation of the primary research literature. Emphasis is on the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis, host resistance, and immune regulation. Information is provided through selected readings and student seminar presentations. The primary objective is to introduce students to current research topics in infection and immunity, and develop their ability to critically evaluate, organize, and present scientific information.
#
Medicine
MED
Department of Medicine
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Note: Joint Medicine/Dentistry Courses are listed under DMED.
Undergraduate Courses Department of Medicine Courses
MED 501 Clinical Pulmonary Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 2-0-0). Basic and clinical lectures on: Lung Structure; Pulmonary Blood Flow; Airflow; Gaseous Diffusion; Ventilation/Perfusion Matching; Control of Ventilation; Oxygen Transport; Lung Defense; Mucociliary Transport; ARDS; Asthma; Exercise; Lung Growth; Surfactant; Lung Metabolism; Pulmonary Function Testing. Prerequisites: General courses in Physiology, Physics and Biochemistry or consent of Department.
MED 502 Gut Microbiota in Health and Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Integrated exploration of concepts and research methods pertaining to gastrointestinal physiology, gastrointestinal disorders, and the role of the commensal microbiota in health and disease of humans and animals. Tools to modify the function of the intestinal microflora for prevention or treatment of disease by administration of probiotic bacteria or by administration of prebiotics. Offered in odd-numbered years. Prerequisites: (*3 Microbiology or *3 Immunology) and consent of instructor. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been received in INT D 525. Offered jointly by the Departments of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science and Medicine.
MED 536 Inflammation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course will introduce the student to inflammation and its role in a range of diseases. An overview is provided on acute and chronic inflammation, inflammatory cells (neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, mast cells, and structural cells), inflammatory mediators, asthma and allergy, and the danger hypothesis in association with the inflammasome. The syllabus includes a mix of lectures and current topic discussions for students to present recent advances in inflammation. Lectures are the same as for MMI 436, but there will be an additional assignment for MED 536. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in MMI 436. Co/Prerequisites: IMIN 371 or Instructor consent.
MED 538 Optional Elective Course Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, variable). An optional year three elective of variable length, to be developed by the student in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 548 Optional Elective Course Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, variable). An optional year four elective of variable length, to be developed by the student in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 566 Special Seminars Œ3-9 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisite: Consent of the course instructor. Content varies from year to year. Topics are announced prior to each registration period. The student’s transcript will carry a title descriptive of the content. May be repeated. Students may not take MED 566 for credit if credit has already been received for SPH 566 of the same topic.
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry Courses
MED 400 Two-Week Medical Elective Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 2 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for undergraduate medical students who are undertaking clinical electives. The type of clinical elective is open to any area of specialization. Prerequisite: enrolment in an MD program and approval by the Electives Coordinator of the Faculty of Medicine.
MED 401 Four-Week Medical Elective Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 4 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for undergraduate medical students who are undertaking clinical electives. The type of clinical elective is open to any area of specialization. Prerequisites: enrolment in an MD program and approval by the Electives Coordinator of the Faculty of Medicine.
MED 402 Eight-Week Medical Elective Œ0 (fi 2) (either term, 8 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for undergraduate medical students who are undertaking clinical electives. The type of clinical elective is open to any area of specialization. Prerequisites: enrolment in an MD program and approval by the Electives Coordinator of the Faculty of Medicine.
MED 403 Twelve-Week Medical Elective Œ0 (fi 3) (either term, 12 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for undergraduate medical students who are undertaking clinical electives. The type of clinical elective is open to any area of specialization. Prerequisites: enrolment in an MD program and approval by the Electives Coordinator of the Faculty of Medicine.
MED 516 Physicianship I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 4-4s-4). This course will encompass all aspects of the development of a physician including but not limited to professionalism, evidence based medicine, ethics, health equity, patient safety, patient immersion experiences, early clinical experiences, communication skills and physical examination, public health, health systems. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 517 First-Year Elective Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 12 hours). Electives time to be developed by the students in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 518 Optional Summer Elective Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). An optional elective of variable length, to be developed by the student in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 520 Pre-Clinical Exam Œ5 (fi 10) (second term, 9 hours). Final pre-clinical exam for students registered in the MD program.
MED 521 Gastroenterology and Nutrition Œ5 (fi 10) (either term, 6 weeks). An integrated course covering nutrition, gastrointestinal physiology, pathophysiology and anatomy. Related surgical, paediatric and geriatric topics will also be addressed. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 522 Reproductive Medicine and Urology Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 7 weeks). An overview of reproductive medicine in both genders, including discussion of conception, pregnancy and fetal development, birth, reproductive technology and relevant health-related issues in men and women. Also covered will be the physiology, pathophysiology and anatomy of the urinary tract, and management of problems in the genitourinary system. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 524 Neurosciences and Organs of Special Senses Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, 7 weeks). Fundamental Clinical Neurosciences taught in an integrated fashion. Involves instruction in subject areas related to the head and neck, including Neuroanatomy, Neurophysiology, Neuropathology, Neuropharmacology, Neuroradiology, Neurology, Neurosurgery, Psychiatry, Rehabilitation Medicine, Otorhinoloaryngology and Ophthalmology. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 525 Oncology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4 weeks). Principles and concepts of clinical oncology. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 526 Physicianship II Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 4-4s-4). This course will build upon the knowledge and skills derived from Physicianship I. This course will encompass all aspects of the development of a physician, including but not limited to professionalism, ethics, health equity, patient safety, patient immersion experiences, early clinical experiences, communication skills and physical examination, public health, health systems, and evidence based medicine. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 527 Second Year Elective Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 12 hours). Elective time to be developed by the student in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 528 Optional Summer Elective Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). An optional elective of variable length, to be developed by the student in consultation with a Faculty supervisor. Open only to students registered in the MD program.
MED 529 Psychiatry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4 weeks). Psychiatry is the medical specialty devoted to the study, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of mental disorders. Each mental health disorder will be explored in terms of definition, epidemiology, etiology, pathophysiology, signs, symptoms, investigations, treatment and prognosis.
MED 531 Physicianship III /Transitions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4 weeks). This course serves as a bridge of learning opportunities of the first two years to the last two years of medical school. It will include: performance of clinical skills within a simulated clinical environment, approach to radiological problems, quality improvement, and social media in medicine, clinical reasoning, and awareness of well-being. This course will build upon the knowledge derived from the Physicianship I and II courses to demonstrate commitment, honesty, integrity, professionalism and compassion in their clinical work. It will be delivered throughout the third year. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 540 Exams Œ5 (fi 10) (second term, 18 hours). Final exams for students registered in the MD program.
MED 541 Physicianship IV /Transitions Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 4 weeks). This course will build upon the knowledge derived from the Physicianship I, II and III courses and will occur throughout the 4th year. Open only to students registered in the MD Program.
MED 543 Integrated Community Clerkship Œ36 (fi 72) (two term, 36 weeks). A patient-centred, community clerkship based in select rural and regional Alberta communities. This course uses Family Medicine as the core of the clerkship experience to provide students with experience in continuity of care, in handling undifferentiated problems, in coordinating care for those with chronic disease, and in other key areas of family medicine and generalist specialties. 32 to 36 weeks will be spent in the rural community. The remainder of the second term will be a mix of electives and selectives.
MED 546 Medicine Student Internship Œ8 (fi 16) (either term, 8 weeks). Student internship in Medicine for students registered in the MD Program.
MED 547 Clinical Electives Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4 weeks). Student internship in electives for students registered in the MD program.
MED 555 Geriatrics Student Internship Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4 weeks). Student internship in Geriatrics for students registered in the MD Program.
MED 556 Medicine Student Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3 weeks). Student internship in medicine for students registered in the MD Program.
MED 557 Clinical Electives Œ10 (fi 20) (either term, 10 weeks). Electives for students registered in the MD Program.
MED 558 Emergency Medicine Students Internship Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4 weeks). Student internship in emergency medicine for students registered in the MD Program.
Graduate Courses
Department of Medicine Courses
MED 571 Directed Reading in the Basic Medical Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading and study of basic medical science topics relevant to the student’s chosen field of study under the direction of one or more faculty members. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 573 Directed Reading in Clinical Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading and study in a field relevant to the student’s chosen field of study under the direction of one or more Faculty members. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 575 Nutrition and Metabolism Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1-1s-0). A seminar and discussion course in advanced nutrition and metabolism that examines current topics in nutrition and features regular seminars on alternate weeks throughout Fall and Winter Terms. A discussion group meets after each seminar. Preference will be given to graduate and postgraduate students in the area of nutrition and metabolism. Maximum enrolment of 15. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 580 Molecular and Physiological Basis of Heart Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The fundamental aim of this course is to take a translational aspect to heart disease by exploring the basis of heart structure and function and to understand the molecular and cellular basis for the pathophysiological perturbations in disease states. Students will be exposed to the quantitative and qualitative changes that occur in human heart disease and current potential therapeutic targets. The use of genetically modified animal models of human heart disease will be highlighted. Prerequisite: consent of Department and Undergraduate Exposure to Cardiovascular Physiology.
MED 600 Introduction to Clinical Trials Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This is a “hands on” course designed to provide students with an understanding and appreciation of the theoretical and practical issues in the conduct of randomized clinical trials. During the course, students will develop their own research proposal and at the end, submit a CIHR-style grant for grading. Topics covered include background/rationale, research question, patient selection, recruitment, randomization, outcome measures, confounding and bias, sample size considerations, developing an analytical plan, designing case report forms, data management and quality assurance, budgeting, informed consent and ethical considerations, and grantsmanship. For more information, see www. epicore.ualberta.ca/MED600. Prerequisites: Introductory epidemiology (PHS 596 or equivalent), Biostatistics I (PHS 598 or equivalent) and permission of the instructor. Because of high demand for this course and the necessity of small class sizes, students are required to complete a form for registration in this course.
MED 602 Principles of Translational Medicine - Chronic Disease =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). The fundamental aim of this course is to explore the translational aspects of important chronic diseases and emerging pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches for treatment. This course is designed to align graduate students with the current trends in modern medical training and be effective “translators of discovery and knowledge”. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 604 Principles of Translational Medicine - Vascular Medicine =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). The course aim is to explore the translational aspects of vascular medicine. How is new knowledge on the function of the vasculature in health and disease be effectively and efficiently translated to patients, improving their well-being? The vasculature system is implicated in many diseases including cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, cerebrovascular disease including vascular dementia, pulmonary disease or several diseases of the blood. A diverse syllabus will cover many common and deadly diseases. A particular emphasis will cover recent fundamental discoveries on the molecular function of the vasculature, along with modern trends in the diagnosis and treatment of vascular disease. This course will support graduate students to be effective “translators of discovery and knowledge”. Prerequisite: Mandatory for graduate students enrolled in MSc in Medicine - Translational Medicine; consent of Department.
MED 606 Principles of Translational Medicine - Inflammatory Infectious Disease =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). This course will examine the preclinical and clinical aspects of selected chronic inflammatory and acute infectious diseases with respect to defining the clinical problem, research challenges, and future directions. Diseases to be discussed will include allergy/asthma, various infectious diseases, and inflammatory bowel disease. The syllabus includes a mix of lectures and current topic discussions for students to present recent advances in these areas. This course is designed to align graduate students with the current trends in modern medical training and be effective “translators of discovery and knowledge”. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 608 Principles of Translational Medicine - Metabolism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-0). The fundamental aim for this course is to explore the role of human nutrition in chronic disease. Common chronic conditions influenced by metabolic pathways such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, cancer and dyslipidemia will be examined. This course is designed to align graduate students with the current trends in modern medical training and be effective “translators of discovery and knowledge”. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 621 The Art of Grant Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to train graduate students in preparing grant applications in order to improve their chances of future success in obtaining research funds from a major Canadian federal funding agency such as the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. The course is targeted primarily towards students who have completed at least one year of graduate work. Preference will be given to those planning to pursue a PhD. Throughout the course, students will be instructed on how to prepare a complete grant application package on a topic that is different from their graduate project. The proposal will be prepared in stages and completed two weeks prior to the end of the semester. Students will then prepare and give presentations for a mock site visit by the funding agency. Students will also participate in a mock peer review committee and make final funding decisions. Enrolment is limited, and registration is by permission of the Department. May not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in NEURO 621.
MED 650 Fundamentals for Clinical Investigators Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3/2-0-0). A biweekly lecture course covering the important aspects of becoming a clinical investigator. Each session will include a lecture followed by a full class discussion and take home assignments related to the lecture. The topics include: clinical trial design, bioethics, biostatistics, literature appraisal, grant writing, manuscript writing, slide presentation for oral presentations, teaching enhancement, time management, ethics of industry liaisons, linking basic bench research to the bedside, technology transfer, career opportunities. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MED 671 Current Topics in Biomedical Research Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). A general seminar course covering recent advances across the field of biomedical research. Research topics will feature the areas of research being investigated by the graduate students and staff of the department. Other topics will provide for the acquisition of basic skills and knowledge in biomedical research and will include experimental design, critical review of the literature, communication skills, ethics of experimentation, and career development. Note: Restricted to graduate students in the Department of Medicine.
MED 700 Fundamentals for Translational Cardiovascular Clinical Investigators (#1) Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). [Strategic Training Fellow in Cardiovascular Research Tomorrow’s Research Cardiovascular Health Professionals (TORCH)]. Is a lecture/ seminar course designed to provide a comprehensive “hands on” exposure to a variety of research fields including Bio-medical, Clinical, Health Services, Social, Cultural, Environmental and Population Health. This multidisciplinary approach will use seminars, debates, case studies, journal clubs and workshops to develop the skills and knowledge base required to implement collaborative cardiovascular research projects. Seminar topics to include: biostatistics and health economics, congestive heart failure, obesity, new technologies, vascular biology, women’s issues in vascular medicine, endothelial dysfunction, and electrophysiology. Prerequisite: Restricted to students who have received consent from TORCH Executive Advisory Committee and the course coordinator.
MED 701 Fundamentals for Translational Cardiovascular Clinical Investigations (#2) Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). [Strategic Training Fellow in Cardiovascular Research Tomorrow’s Research Cardiovascular Health Professionals (TORCH)]. Is a lecture/ seminar course designed to provide a comprehensive “hands on” exposure to a variety of research fields including Bio-medical, Clinical, Health Services, Social, Cultural, Environmental and Population Health. This multidisciplinary approach will use seminars, debates, case studies, journal clubs and workshops to develop the skills and knowledge base required to implement collaborative cardiovascular research projects. Seminar topics to include: stroke, hypertension, congenital heart disease, atherosclerosis, gene therapy, databases, aging, stents, MRI principles and the metabolic syndrome. Prerequisite: MED 700.
#
Microbiology (Biological Sciences)
MICRB
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Biology (BIOL); Botany (BOT); Entomology (ENT); Genetics (GENET); Zoology (ZOOL)
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
MICRB 265 General Microbiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-4). This course will focus on the structure and physiology of free-living and pathogenic bacteria. The diversity of their metabolic activities, the interaction of microbes with their environment, symbiotic relationships and cell-to-cell communication are major topics. Lectures and laboratory exercises are coordinated to explore topics in basic microbiology, environmental microbiology, molecular microbiology, and the production of economically or medically important products through microbial biotechnology. Prerequisites: BIOL 107 and CHEM 164 or 261. SCI 100 may be used in lieu of BIOL 107 and CHEM 261.
MICRB 311 Microbial Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The structure, growth, and metabolic path-ways used by bacteria, yeasts, and molds. Emphasis is placed on the comparative biochemical aspects of microbial life. Prerequisites: MICRB 265 and BIOCH 200 or 205.
MICRB 315 Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Microbial production of commercially important metabolites, drugs, food grade enzymes and platform chemicals; use and modification of microbes for industrial-scale processes including biofuel production; bioprospecting for novel activities; strain improvement and synthetic biology; fundamentals of fermenter operation. Prerequisite: MICRB 265. Note: MICRB 315 and 415 cannot both be taken for credit.
MICRB 316 Molecular Microbiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Factors that affect prokaryotic gene expression at the levels of replication, transcription, post-transcriptional and post-translational control. Topics will include mobile genetic elements and their effect on chromosome structure and gene expression; alternate sigma factors; protein modification and degradation; RNA structure, processing and decay; and DNA modification and rearrangement in gene control. Prerequisites: GENET 270, MICRB 265 and BIOCH 203/205 or BIOCH 200. Note: MICRB 316 and 516 cannot both be taken for credit.
MICRB 320 Microbial Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A broad range of topics in microbial ecology are covered including aquatic and terrestrial habitats, the influence of health and disease on the human microbiome, symbiosis and pathogenesis in environmental systems, and the application of ecological theory to microbial populations and communities. Prerequisite: MICRB 265. Pre- or corequisite: BIOL 208, or consent of instructor.
MICRB 343 Analysis of Microbial Macromolecules Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Description and critical discussion of current techniques used for the isolation and characterization of macromolecular constituents of prokaryotic cells with emphasis on proteins. Prerequisites: MICRB 311 or consent of instructor.
MICRB 345 Microbial Laboratory Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-6). A series of laboratory projects employing current techniques used in the isolation and characterization of macromolecular constituents of prokaryotic cells. Corequisite or Prerequisite: MICRB 343. Offered in alternate years.
MICRB 392 Environmental Microbiology Laboratory Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-6). Laboratory experiments use culture, molecular, chemical and microscopy-based methods for identifying, enumerating and characterizing the activity of microbes from aquatic and terrestrial environments. Bacterial communities involved in petroleum biodegradation, activity assays for industrially and environmentally important microbial products, and ecological processes such as biogeography are also studied. Presence in the laboratory may occasionally be required outside of the regularly scheduled lab section. Prerequisite: MICRB 265. Credit may not be obtained for both MICRB 392 and 492. Offered in alternative years.
MICRB 410 Bacterial Structure and Virulence Factors Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The bacterial cell wall is discussed in the context of cell growth, cell division, and as a target for antimicrobial therapy. This course also covers relevant aspects of the structure and function of virulence factors, with an emphasis on secretion systems and other toxin delivery mechanisms. Students will analyze primary literature and participate in problem-solving exercises. Prerequisite: any 300 level MICRB course or MMI 351, or consent of instructor. Note: MICRB 410 and 510 cannot both be taken for credit.
MICRB 423 Extreme Microbiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This advanced microbiology course will cover selected topics of life in extreme environments, with particular emphasis on diversity, evolutionary and physiological adaptations, methodology for studying extreme environments, the effective limits of life, implications for biogeochemical cycling, and astrobiology. Examples of adaptation to specific environments will be the focus of student projects. Oral presentations required. Prerequisites: BIOL 322 or any 300 level MICRB course or consent of instructor. Note: MICRB 423 and 523 cannot both be taken for credit.
MICRB 491 Environmental Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Interactions between microorganisms and the environment. Topics include methods of sampling various environments, methods for monitoring microbial activities, petroleum microbiology, bioremediation, survival of airborne microorganisms, microbial metabolism of selected pollutants. Prerequisite: MICRB 265, corequisite: a 300-level Biological Sciences course or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit can be received in only one of MICRB 391, 491 and 591.
Note: For other Immunology courses not listed above, see MMI listing.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in graduate programs in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee: BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415; NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
MICRB 510 Advanced Topics in Bacterial Structure and Virulence Factors Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The bacterial cell wall is discussed in the context of cell growth, cell division, and as a target for antimicrobial therapy. This course also covers relevant aspects of the structure and function of virulence factors, with an emphasis on secretion systems and other toxin delivery mechanisms. Students will analyze primary literature and participate in problem-solving exercises. Lectures are the same as for MICRB 410 but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both MICRB 410 and 510.
MICRB 514 Advanced Topics in Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Critical reading and discussion of scientific literature. Students will present scientific articles for group discussion and will also prepare a major literature review in their field of study. Topics covered will vary from year to year. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
MICRB 516 Advanced Molecular Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Lecture course on molecular mechanisms relating to gene expression of prokaryotes based on the current literature. In addition, students will prepare an analytical literature review on a chosen topic relating to this field. Prerequisite: consent of the instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both MICRB 316 and 516.
MICRB 523 Advanced Extreme Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This advanced microbiology course will cover selected topics of life in extreme environments, with particular emphasis on diversity, evolutionary and physiological adaptations, methodology for studying extreme environments, the effective limits of life, implications for biogeochemical cycling, and astrobiology. Examples of adaptation to specific environments will be the focus of student projects. Oral presentations required. Lectures are the same as for MICRB 423, but with an additional assignment and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. MICRB 423 and 523 cannot both be taken for credit.
MICRB 591 Advanced Environmental Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Interactions between microorganisms and their environment. Topics include methods of sampling various environments, methods for monitoring microbial activities, petroleum microbiology, bioremediation, survival of airborne microorganisms, microbial metabolism of selected pollutants. Lectures and exams are the same as MICRB 491, but preparation of a major term paper and an oral presentation are required. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both MICRB 491 and 591.
MICRB 606 Microbiology Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Intended for all Microbiology and Biotechnology graduate students, except those in their second year who should register for MICRB 607. Credit may be obtained more than once.
MICRB 607 Microbiology Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Graded seminar course intended for second-year graduate students.
#
Middle Eastern and African Studies
MEAS
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
MEAS 200 Introduction to Middle Eastern and African Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Explores conceptual framework and interdisciplinary tools for understanding Middle East and Africa as geographical and intellectual space.
MEAS 300 Themes and Topics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MEAS 330 Cultural Representations of Post-coloniality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Questioning identity in the post-colonial Middle East and Africa through expressive forms (literature, visual and performing arts, political cartoons, cinema, advertising, and other popular media).
MEAS 400 Topics in the Study of the Middle East and Africa =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Explores themes and issues central to what unifies and divides the Middle East and Africa. Exploits interdisciplinarity as a tool to deepen methodological and theoretical understanding.
MEAS 475 Methodology in Middle Eastern and African Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of the Program Coordinator.
MEAS 480 Directed Reading in Middle Eastern and African Studies =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Program.
MEAS 499 Honors Essay in Middle Eastern and African Studies Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors Essay. Prerequisite: MEAS 475
Graduate Courses
MEAS 500 Topics in Comparative Interdisciplinary Research in Middle Eastern and African Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Topics vary by instructor.
MEAS 521 Directed Reading in Middle Eastern and African Studies Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Topics vary by student need and/or instructor interest. Intended to complement MEAS 500.
#
Mining Engineering
MIN E
School of Mining and Petroleum Engineering Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Faculty of Engineering
Undergraduate Courses
MIN E 295 Introduction to Mining Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Mining concepts and terminology, company operations, stages of mining, unit mining operations, surface and underground mine development and methods, feasibility studies and mine costs, ethics, equity, sustainable development and environmental stewardship, public and worker safety and health considerations including the context of the Alberta Occupational Health and Safety Act.
MIN E 310 Ore Reserve Estimation Œ3 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Conventional and geostatistical methods for construction of orebody models. Contouring techniques for mapping bounding surfaces of stratigraphic layers. Coordinate transforms and geometric techniques. Estimation and simulation methods for characterizing ore grade variability. Ore reserve classification, uncertainty assessment, mine selectivity, and grade control. Corequisites: MATH 209 and EAS 210.
MIN E 323 Rock Mechanics Œ4.5 (fi 8) (first term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Mechanical properties of rock masses, field and laboratory determination; classification and index testing; permeability and flow; stresses around underground openings, elastic prototypes and numerical methods; ground support principles and mechanics of common support systems, loads on supports; hydraulic backfill, earth pressures, consolidation theory and practical consequences in mining; mechanics of subsidence and caving; rockburst mechanics; slope stability, rock mechanics instrumentation. Prerequisite: CIV E 270.
MIN E 324 Drilling, Blasting, and Explosives Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Drilling methods, breakage mechanics, performance, and equipment. Explosive characteristics, initiation systems, selection, handling, and loading. Blasting, rock dynamics, design of surface and underground blasts, fragmentation prediction, vibrations and damage control, monitoring. Prerequisite: MIN E 295.
MIN E 325 Mine Planning and Design Œ4.5 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Introduction to mine planning and design using standard software tools. Geological and economic block models; open pit mine layout and planning requirements; pit limit optimization; haul road design; pit and waste dump design; long and short-term mine production scheduling; cut-off grade optimization. Prerequisites: MIN E 295, CIV E 265, MIN E 310.
MIN E 330 Mine Transport and Plant Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Underground and surface mine transport systems, including truck haulage, free steered vehicles, rail haulage, wire rope hoisting, belt conveying, silo storage, hydraulic pipelining and pneumatic conveying. Auxiliary mining services such as electric power distribution, pumping and compressed air power. Labs include software-based design problems dealing with the materials taught in the classroom. Prerequisites: MIN E 295 and ECE 209.
MIN E 402 Mine Design Project I Œ4.5 (fi 8) (first term, 1-1s-6). First phase of a dynamic scenario-based full feasibility study from exploration through operations to final mine closure plan. Including preparation of a geological model and calculation of resources. Generation of focused technical reports, community consultation and economic reports. Review and identify conceptual mining methods for consideration in Mine Design Project II (see MIN E 403). Prepare regular team reports and presentations. Present final report during a half-day final industry seminar. Weekly seminars with instructor and industry. Corequisites: MIN E 413 and MIN E 414. Note: Restricted to fourth- year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
MIN E 403 Mine Design Project II Œ4.5 (fi 8) (second term, 1-1s-6). Second phase of a dynamic scenario-based full feasibility study from exploration through operations to final mine closure plan. This course follows MIN E 402 with detailed mine plans and equipment selection, manpower, ventilation, processing, environment and economic analyses. Prepare regular team reports and present final report during a half-day final industry seminar. Weekly seminars with instructor and industry. Prerequisite: MIN E 402. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
MIN E 407 Principles of Mine Ventilation Œ3.8 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Principles and practices of underground total air conditioning. Control of quantity, quality, and temperature-humidity of the underground mines. Design and analyses of mine ventilation networks. Theory and applications of fans to mine ventilation systems. Ventilation planning and overall system design. Prerequisites: MIN E 414 and one of CIV E 330 or CH E 312. Corequisite: MIN E 422.
MIN E 408 Mining Enterprise Economics Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 2-0-2). Fundamentals of economic evaluation. Cost estimation, commodity price modelling and revenue forecasts and taxation related to mine development. Economic evaluation of mining ventures, profitability, risks and uncertainty analyses. Commodity markets and mine management strategies. Weekly laboratory/tutorial sessions will address case studies and specific problems. Prerequisites: ENG M 310 or 401, and STAT 235.
MIN E 413 Surface Mining Methods and Operations Management Œ3.8 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Cyclic and continuous surface mining methods. Production and productivity considering the generation of mine specific landform structures. Design for closure with consideration of mining waste streams, reclamation, restoration and rehabilitation. Aspects of operations management will be highlighted through case studies. Prerequisites: MIN E 310, 330, 323, and 325.
MIN E 414 Underground Mining Methods Œ3.8 (fi 8) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Methods and applications in underground excavation and tools to select equipment for underground drilling and loading processes. Methodology to examine shape, size and orientation effects, as well as support requirements, in the design of underground mine opening. Methods include room-and-pillar, sublevel stoping and caving, vertical crater retreat, block caving, selective methods for vein mines, and underground coal mining systems. Labs include software-based design problems dealing with underground mining methods selection, visualization and optimization. Prerequisites: MIN E 323, MIN E 324 and MIN E 325 or consent of Instructor.
MIN E 420 Mine Equipment Selection and Maintenance Œ3.8 (fi 8) (second term, 3-3s/2-0). Introduction to the principles of equipment selection and maintenance practice. Selected issues of machine and component longevity, wear, service and performance for both surface and underground equipment. Basic principles of maintenance management are introduced. Prerequisites: CIV E 270, MIN E 413 and MIN E 414.
MIN E 422 Environmental Impact of Mining Activities Œ2.5 (fi 5) (second term, 2-1s-0). Environmental impact of mining projects and activities. Topics include: environmental impact assessment (EIA) processes, sustainable development, mine closure, reclamation planning, social responsibility of mining, regulations, guidelines, surface subsidence, tailings disposal, erosion and acid rock drainage. Corequisite: MIN E 413.
MIN E 555 Special Topics in Mining Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Research studies and/or projects dealing with selected metal, nonmetal and coal mining subjects. Suitable subjects are chosen in consultation with a mining engineering faculty member. Typical study categories are reserve evaluation, surface and underground mining methods and operations, mine planning, computer simulation of mining operations, mineral processing, ventilation, regulations, mine safety, feasibility studies, economics and management. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor
Graduate Courses
MIN E 612 Principles of Geostatistics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Geostatistical methods are presented for characterizing the spatial distribution of regionalized variables. The theory of random variables and multivariate spatial distributions is developed. This class focuses on the quantification of spatial variability with variograms, estimation with kriging, and simulation with Gaussian techniques.
MIN E 613 Non-Parametric and Multivariate Geostatistics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Cell based methods for geology modeling, including indicator formalism for categorical data and truncated Gaussian simulation. Object based and process-based approaches for fluvial reservoirs. Indicators for continuous variable estimation and simulation. Multivariate geostatistics including models of coregionalization, cokriging, Gaussian cosimulation, Markov-Bayes simulation and multivariate data transformation approaches. Introduction to advanced simulation approaches including direct simulation, simulated annealing and multiple point simulation. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
MIN E 614 Risk Management with Geostatistics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Advanced methods for the modeling of heterogeneity, quantification of uncertainty and management of risk. The theory and place of historical and advanced methods in geostatistics. Matrix methods, alternative variogram measures, kriging with a trend, dual kriging, spectral simulation, direct simulation and multiple point statistics.
MIN E 615 Application of Geostatistics Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Public domain and commercial software are reviewed for geostatistical modeling. Special projects in petroleum, mining, environmental and other areas will be undertaken.
MIN E 620 Rock Mechanics Œ4 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-1). Properties of intact rocks and testing methods. Properties of rock masses and rock mass classifications. Rock and rock mass strength criteria. Stresses in rock masses. Analysis of rock mass performance, rock support and stabilization. Empirical, analytical and numerical analysis techniques. Surface and underground rock engineering case studies Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
MIN E 622 Mining Equipment Design, Benchmarking and Performance Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). A study of selected surface and underground mining equipment designs, enhancements and appropriateness for operation within given mining conditions. Strategies for machine dynamic performance benchmarking and evaluation, as tools for planning, maintenance and operations scheduling are considered for good and poor operating environments. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
MIN E 630 Advanced Mine Transport Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Advanced studies in the methods and systems of material movement in mines. In-depth consideration of selection, specifications, and costs of transportation for surface and underground mines. Prerequisites: MIN E 330 and 413, or 414, or consent of Instructor.
MIN E 631 Surface Mine Design and Optimization Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Surface mining methods, mechanics of surface mine layouts design, haul roads design, waste dump design, theory of Lerchs- Grossman’s, floating cone, conditional simulation, neural network and heuristic algorithms for surface mine optimization. Large scale applications of these algorithms for designing and optimizing surface mine layouts and subsequent advance mining systems design. Students undertake design projects under Instructor’s direction. Prerequisites: MIN E 413 or consent of Instructor.
MIN E 632 Mining Equipment Engineering and Management Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Surface and underground mining equipment engineering and management approaches are investigated. Use of the observational method to equipment management is introduced. Theory and application of planning, operations and maintenance strategies will be discussed with appropriate case studies. Students undertake retrofit and/or hybrid design assignments for selected equipment operational issues. Prerequisite: MIN E 520, MIN E 622 or consent of Instructor.
MIN E 640 Simulation of Industrial Systems Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Formulation of models of engineering problems and industrial systems for experimentation using a general purpose simulation language. Statistical and operational validation of simulation results. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
MIN E 641 Discrete-Event Simulation Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Fundamentals of discrete-event simulation modelling and its industrial applications. Theoretical and statistical aspects of simulation, including input analysis, random number generation, experimental design, and variance reduction techniques. Arena Simulation Environment used for explaining simulation concepts.
MIN E 650 Special Topics in Mining Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special studies of developments of current interest within the mining industry in exploration, mining methods, mine planning, mine simulation, environment, regulations, economics and management; e.g. tar sands mining, ocean mining, in situ gasification.
MIN E 651 Application of Mine Planning and Design Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). The course integrates theory and applications by means of undertaking a design project using mine planning software. Emphasis is placed on pit limit optimization, strategic mine planning, short-term planning, and open pit mine design. Prerequisites: MIN E 631 or consent of the Instructor.
MIN E 661 Advanced Applications of Simulation and Modelling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). The course integrates theory and applications by means of undertaking a real-world simulation project using discrete event simulation software. Emphasis is placed on transporters, customization of simulation using VBA, pseudo agent-based modeling, simulation based optimization, verification and validation techniques, and experimental design. Prerequisite MIN E 641 or consent of the instructor.
MIN E 710 Mining Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings and discussion of selected topics in mining engineering.
MIN E 900 Directed Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in a Masters of Engineering program.
MIN E 910 Directed Research Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in the joint MBA/MEng program.
#
Modern Languages and Cultural Studies
MLCS
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
MLCS 199 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course may be taken twice if topics vary.
MLCS 204 Forms of Folklore =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MLCS 205 History of Folklore Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History, concepts, and practices of Folklore.
MLCS 210 Language(s) of Culture =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the major issues within the discipline of Cultural Studies from an international perspective, and provision of the necessary terminology and theoretical tools for examining general topics and case studies with emphasis on the question of languages.
MLCS 231 Language and Power =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). How language, both spoken and written, creates and sustains economic, social, and political power.
MLCS 299 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Course may be taken twice if topics vary.
MLCS 300 Introduction to Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Translation problems and strategies illustrated with examples from a variety of languages. Prerequisite: *6 in a foreign language at the 150-level or above.
MLCS 305 Carnival =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practices throughout the world.
MLCS 399 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 400 The History of Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A broad historical perspective on the contributions made by translators to the intellectual and cultural history of the world through consideration of the Germanic, Romance and Slavic traditions. The role of the translator and basic principles governing the various traditions are examined to gain insight into different types of translation (religious, literary, technical) and significant moments in the history of translation. Prerequisite: *6 in a Language Other than English at the 200-level or above or consent of Department.
MLCS 405 Contemporary Folklore Scholarship and Canadian Folklore Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MLCS 473 Cultural Representations, World Media and Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A discursive approach to the study of cultural representations and ethical issues in world media. Prerequisite: *6 at the 300-level, of which *3 must be in a language taught in Modern Languages and Cultural Studies, or consent of Department.
MLCS 475 X-Rated: Sex on Screen Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Considers the representation of sex acts captured on film, video, and other forms of moving pictures. Interrogating notions of acceptability, the popular, high art, exploitation and industry machinery. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department.
MLCS 499 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
MLCS 572 Language Use and Cross-Cultural Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 573 Cultural Representations, World Media and Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 575 X-Rated: Sex on Screen Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Considers the representation of sex acts captured on film, video, and other forms of moving pictures. Interrogating notions of acceptability, the popular, high art, exploitation and industry machinery. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department.
MLCS 599 Directed Reading Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MLCS 600 Translation Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The multiple ways in which linguistics, literary criticism, philosophy, cultural theories and feminist theories have informed the practice of translation and contributed to the production of different translation theories. In their presentations and papers, students are encouraged to use examples taken from languages with which they are familiar.
MLCS 601 Special Topics in Translation Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 602 History of Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An overview of the history of translation and the contributions made by translators to intellectual and cultural history. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 620 Applied Linguistics: Second Language Acquisition and Bilingualism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Major theories and issues in past and present second language acquisition research. Course is cross-listed as LING 620. Credit will only be granted for MLCS 620 or LING 620. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MLCS 621 Applied Linguistics: Language and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The systematic study of language and society, including a theoretical foundation in sociolinguistics and discourse studies. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MLCS 622 Applied Linguistics: Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods in applied linguistics research. Prerequisite: LING 101 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MLCS 630 The Disciplines of Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The history of the study of literature, focusing on the relation between “national” and world literature, and the links to other media and disciplines. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 640 Media and Cultural Studies Methodologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 650 Teaching Strategies for Postsecondary Language Instructors =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Designed to help graduate teaching assistants to develop practical expertise in language instruction at the college and university levels. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 651 Critical Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Literary and cultural theory from classical times to the twentieth century from around the world. Students will read primary texts. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 652 Critical Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Literary and cultural theory in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries from around the world. Students will read primary texts. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 696 Topics in Media and Cultural Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 697 Topics in Transnational and Comparative Literatures Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MLCS 698 Topics in Applied Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MLCS 795 Portfolio I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Three individualized modules tailored to each student’s professional goals and developed by the student in conjunction with the department. This is a pass/ fail course, which is required of all students. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 796 Portfolio II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Three individualized modules tailored to each student’s professional goals and developed by the student in conjunction with the department. This is a pass/ fail course which is required of all course-based MA students. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 797 Academic and Professional Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Preparation and instruction in academic writing. This is a pass/ fail course. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 798 Comprehensives Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Preparation for the comprehensive exams. This is a pass/ fail course. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 799 Candidacy Colloquium Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Preparation for the candidacy exam. This is a pass/ fail course. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MLCS 900 Directed Research Project =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned).
MLCS 901 MA Research Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned).
#
Multimedia
MM
Department of Computing Science Faculty of Science
Graduate Courses
MM 801 HCI and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Multimedia data, e.g. image, video, static and dynamic 3D models, sound and signal, are often delivered to the users via display, haptic or other sensor-based devices. Understanding how human and computer interact can enhance application performance. The understanding of perceptual responses can be achieved by monitoring facial expression, tracking body gesture, hearing their voices and so on. Human perceptual response can be affected by prior knowledge, environment, content communicated from the computer, etc. This course discusses some of these aspects, e.g., computer vision and image processing based techniques to support human-centric individual and collaborative interactive applications, including multi-touch for real-time interaction. Human perceptual factors and user study methodologies will also be covered. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 802 Multimedia Communications Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). As a result of the advances in network infrastructures and increasing user participation in social media using displays ranging from IMAX theatres to home entertainment systems, and from desktops to handheld devices, problems associated with multimedia content encoding, e.g., HEVC, synchronization, scheduling and delivery, on top of potential packet loss, have increased significantly. These issues are particularly challenging in real-time applications. This course focuses on time and space optimization techniques with the goal to achieve Quality of Service (QoS) and Quality of Experience (QoE), taking perceptual quality into consideration, to support the communication and visualization of multimedia content transmitted over reliable as well as unreliable networks. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 803 Image and Video Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Image and Video quality is essential in many applications, which deliver educational content, medical images, games, movies, video-on-demand and so on. In order to generate high quality image and video, especially given the sheer volume of consumer demand and under constrained resources, e.g., time and bandwidth, it is necessary to understand the image and video processing pipeline from the initial creation limitations to the final display at the receiver. This course focuses on reviewing various image/video processing techniques, as well as the quality assessment metrics proposed in the literature. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 804 Graphics and Animation Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Developing appealing graphics and animations has become a requirement in many industrial applications like entertainment, advertising and online education. Animation is effective in explaining abstract concepts in biology, physics and medicine. 3D graphics and simulation is also beneficial in surgical training and planning. This course is intended to provide in-depth discussions on graphics and animation techniques, in particular relating to 3D data acquisition, processing, transmission and rendering. Students will have the opportunity to understand and compare various state-of-the-art techniques in 3D modeling, animation and special effects. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 805 Computer Vision and 3DTV Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). While traditional image and video remain at the core of multimedia content, 3D video is perceived as the next generation in video technology. 3D video incorporates the depth perspective which enables viewers to feel immersed in a more realistic environment. This course provides students with the latest 3D video developments and in particular relating to stereoscopic and multi-view with or without special eye-wear. Many of the techniques proposed on 3D video inherit much of the strengths from 2D video methods and computer vision techniques. The 3D component is also included in the latest HEVC standard. This course will focus on literature review and survey of these techniques. Group studies, discussions and presentations constitute the main thrust of the course. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 806 Virtual Reality and Tele-Presence Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Virtual reality and augmented reality can provide an immersive environment where many scenarios can be simulated. For example, manufacturing and engineering tasks, medical planning and training, art and design, rehabilitation, Physics, Biology and Chemistry concept exploration and many others can benefit from a virtual reality environment . This course focuses on the challenges of setting up a user friendly virtual reality scene where users can interact in an intuitive and natural way. The use of interactive techniques and sensor-based devices, such as haptic and head-mount display, in creating a virtual environment for scientific analysis, visualization exploration and Tele- presence, as well as how mobile users can participate in these applications, will be discussed. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 807 Multimedia Project I Œ9 (fi 18) (variable, variable). Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 808 Multimedia Project II Œ9 (fi 18) (variable, variable). Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 809 Multimedia Supplementary Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 810 Multimedia Supplementary Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, variable). Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 811 Multimedia Topic I Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Elected multimedia topics approved by Program coordinator and Instructor. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 812 Multimedia Topic II Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Elected multimedia topics approved by Program coordinator and Instructor. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 813 Hot Topics in Multimedia I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The multimedia pipeline includes data acquisition, processing, transmission and visualization, as well as quality assessment. Over the years, state-of-the-art techniques have been developed in these areas. Nevertheless, emerging technologies in hardware, systems and tools necessitate continuous evolution of multimedia algorithms and inventions. Driven by industrial demands and consumer preferences, recent advances, e.g. Internet-of-Things, Cloud Computing, High Dynamic Display, visual recognition, multimedia mining and so on, have brought revolution in multimedia research and development. This course intends to introduce some latest hot topics in multimedia so that students understand industrial requirements and applications, and prepare for their careers. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
MM 814 Hot Topics in Multimedia II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The multimedia pipeline includes data acquisition, processing, transmission and visualization, as well as quality assessment. Over the years, state-of-the-art techniques have been developed in these areas. Nevertheless, emerging technologies in hardware, systems and tools necessitate continuous evolution of multimedia algorithms and inventions. Driven by industrial demands and consumer preferences, recent advances, e.g. Internet-of-Things, Cloud Computing, High Dynamic Display, visual recognition, multimedia mining and so on, have brought revolution in multimedia research and development. This course intends to introduce some latest hot topics in multimedia so that students understand industrial requirements and applications, and prepare for their careers. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
#
Music
MUSIC
Department of Music Faculty of Arts
Note: The ability to read music is required for all courses numbered 207 and greater except MUSIC 248, 348, 448, and 548.
Undergraduate Courses
MUSIC 100 Rudiments of Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of music theory approached through aural and written training. Note: Not available for degree credit to students enrolled in a BMus (all routes) degree program.
MUSIC 101 Introduction to Western Art Music =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of music literature with an emphasis on listening and analytical tools. A brief survey of the history of Western music will be included. Not available for degree credit to BMus (all routes) students.
MUSIC 102 Introduction to World Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 165.
MUSIC 103 Introduction to Popular Music =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of popular music’s development as a category of musical and cultural practice, an industry and an object of study, during the twentieth century.
MUSIC 122 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 124 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 125 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes) and BMus/BEd students.
MUSIC 126 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 127 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six one-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 129 Fundamental Keyboard Skills Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BA (Honors) Music Major students.
MUSIC 132 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 140 Choral Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Concert Choir or Madrigal Singers. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 141 Instrumental Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Wind Ensemble, University Symphony Orchestra, or Concert Band. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on audition.
MUSIC 143 Indian Music Ensemble I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-4L-0). The classical music of India, through group instruction in singing, tabla (drums), sitar (plucked lute), sarangi (bowed lute), bansuri (flute), harmonium, ensemble performance, and related readings, films, and discussions. A set of instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 144 West African Music Ensemble I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Polyphonic and polyrhythmic music of West Africa, through ensemble performance of the percussion and vocal music of the Ewe people of Ghana, and related readings, films, and discussions. A set of Ewe percussion instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 148 Middle Eastern and North African Music Ensemble I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). The study of Middle Eastern and North African vocal and instrumental music (primarily Arab, Persian, and Turkish musical traditions) through group instruction and ensemble performance, and related readings, films, and discussions. The ability to read music is not required. Some traditional instruments will be available. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 149 Jazz Ensembles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Jazz Band I or Jazz Band II. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on audition.
MUSIC 151 Aural and Keyboard Skills I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). The development of basic musicianship skills through dictation and performance of pitch, rhythmic, and keyboard exercises. Prerequisite: MUSIC 100 or satisfactory completion of Department of Music Theory Placement Exam and Aural Skills Exam for other than BMus students. Corequisite: MUSIC 155 or 156. Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, BEd Music Major/Minor, BA (Honors) Music Major, and BA Music Major/Minor students.
MUSIC 155 Music Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Diatonic harmony and voice leading; elementary analysis. Prerequisite: MUSIC 100 or satisfactory completion of Department of Music Theory Placement Examination. Registration priority given to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, BEd Music Major/Minor, BA (Honors) Music Major, and BA Music Major/Minor students.
MUSIC 156 Music Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Chromatic harmony and voice leading; analysis. Prerequisite: MUSIC 155. Registration priority given to BMus (all routes), BMus/ BEd, BEd Music Major/Minor, BA (Honors) Music Major, and BA Music Major/ Minor students.
MUSIC 192 Contemporary Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Performance and coaching experience in a range of 20thcentury and contemporary repertoires. Prerequisite: consent of the Department based on audition.
MUSIC 193 Experimental Improvisation Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Improvised, experimental music explored through creative exercises, group instruction and performance. No formal training is required. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 201 Western Music and Contexts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of selected works and their significance in a variety of musical, social, and historical contexts. Prerequisite: MUSIC 101 or equivalent. Not available for degree credit to BMus (all routes) students
MUSIC 202 Introduction to Ethnomusicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces issues arising from and tools for understanding the musical diversity surveyed in MUSIC 102. Prerequisite: MUSIC 102 or consent of the department.
MUSIC 203 Issues in Popular Music Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical study of popular musics in contemporary society, approached through social and cultural theory. Prerequisite: MUSIC 103 or consent of Department.
MUSIC 206 History of Jazz Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 313.
MUSIC 207 Instruments for Children Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Laboratory experience with recorder ensemble, small winds, chording and percussion instruments. Prerequisites: MUSIC 150 or 156, and 151.
MUSIC 213 Woodwind Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1L-0). Introduction to woodwind instruments for music educators. Prerequisite: Music 150 or 156 and 151. Corequisite or prerequisite: Music 121 or 125, or 124, or consent of Department. NOTE: Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA (Honors) Music Major students.
MUSIC 214 Brass Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1L-0). Introduction to brass instruments for music educators. Prerequisite: Music 150 or 156 and 151 or equivalent. Corequisite or prerequisite: Music 121 or 125, or 124, or consent of Department. NOTE: Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA (Honors) Music Major students.
MUSIC 215 Percussion Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1L-0). Introduction to percussion and rhythm section instruments for music educators. Prerequisite: Music 150 or 156 and 151. Corequisite or prerequisite: Music 121 or 125, or 124, or consent of Department. NOTE: Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA (Honors) Music Major students.
MUSIC 222 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 224 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisites: MUSIC 121 or 125, or 124 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MUSIC 225 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes) and BMus/BEd students. Prerequisite: MUSIC 121 or 125, or 124 or equivalent.
MUSIC 226 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 227 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six one-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 230 Choral Techniques and Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: MUSIC 150 or 156, and 151, or equivalent. Note: Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA (Honors) Music Major students.
MUSIC 232 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 245 Introduction to Music Technologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Computer technology with a focus on MIDI, synthesis, and software programs for sequencing, music notation, audio recording and transformation, and music on the Internet. Prerequisites: ability to read music. Registration priority will be given to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, BEd Music Major/Minor, BA (Honors) Music Major and BA Music Major students.
MUSIC 251 Aural and Keyboard Skills II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). A continuation of MUSIC 151. Prerequisite: MUSIC 151. Corequisite: MUSIC 255 or 256 or consent of Department.
MUSIC 255 Music Theory III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elementary contrapuntal writing; analysis of Baroque and Classical Music. Prerequisites: MUSIC 150 or 155 and 156.
MUSIC 256 Music Theory IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced analysis, study of works from the late Classical and Romantic repertoire. Prerequisite: MUSIC 255.
MUSIC 259 Introduction to Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Pre or corequisites: MUSIC 150 or 155, and 151 or equivalent. Note: Public performance of works completed in the course will be expected. Registration priority given to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, BA (Honors) Music Major, BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA Music Major students.
MUSIC 260 Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 259. Registration priority given to BMus, BA (Honors) Music Major, BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA Music Major students.
MUSIC 263 Instrumentation and Arranging Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A study of the technical and expressive characteristics of the standard orchestral instruments. An introduction to historical developments in orchestration is included. Prerequisites: MUSIC 150 or 156 or equivalent. Formerly MUSIC 462.
MUSIC 280 Introduction to the Study of Western Music History Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A study of music history and style to 1600 from the perspective of social, cultural, and philosophical contexts, emphasizing the development of listening, score reading, research, critical thinking, and communication skills. Prerequisite: Music 155 or, for students not in a BMus program, consent of the department. Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 281.
MUSIC 283 Western Art Music, 1600-1850 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A study of music history and style from 1600 to 1850 from social, cultural, and philosophical perspectives with attention to listening, score reading, research, critical thinking, and communication skills. Prerequisite: MUSIC 280. Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 281.
MUSIC 284 Western Art Music, 1850-present Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A study of music history and style from 1850 to present from social, cultural, and philosophical perspectives with attention to listening, score reading, research, critical thinking, and communication skills. Prerequisite: MUSIC 280. Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 282.
MUSIC 303 Piano Pedagogy I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: MUSIC 221, 224, 225, or equivalent.
MUSIC 304 Piano Pedagogy II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 303.
MUSIC 314 Music in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The history of music in Canada from colonial times to the present. Prerequisite: MUSIC 101 or equivalent. Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 215.
MUSIC 315 Introduction to Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Development of basic conducting techniques and score reading. Prerequisites: MUSIC 150 or 156, and 151, or equivalent
MUSIC 321 Diction for Singers I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). The application of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to singing in English and German. Prerequisite: MUSIC 125 (Voice) or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in MUSIC 320.
MUSIC 322 Diction for Singers II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). The application of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to singing in French and Italian. Prerequisite: MUSIC 125 (Voice) or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in MUSIC 320.
MUSIC 365 Topics in Ethnomusicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 202 or consent of the department. Not available to students with credit in MUSIC 265. May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
MUSIC 403 Piano Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 404 Piano Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 409 Vocal Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An extensive study of art song and concert repertoire composed for solo voice. Course format is seminar- and performance-based. Prerequisite: MUSIC 225 (voice or any instrument) or equivalent.
MUSIC 410 Vocal Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A continuation of the study of art song and concert repertoire composed for solo voice. Course format is seminar-and performance- based. Prerequisite: MUSIC 409.
MUSIC 413 Studies in the History of Jazz Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 416 Instrumental Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 315.
MUSIC 417 Choral Conducting and Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 315.
MUSIC 422 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 424 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Open only to non-BMus students and students transferring into the BMus Composition and Theory route. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisites: MUSIC 224 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MUSIC 425 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes) and BMus/BEd students. Note: Students intending to enrol in MUSIC 526 are required to have successfully presented a public recital while enrolled in MUSIC 425. Prerequisite: MUSIC 225.
MUSIC 426 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Open only to non- BMus students and students transferring into the BMus Composition and Theory route. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisites: MUSIC 224 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MUSIC 427 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six one-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition. Not to be taken by students with credit in MUSIC 420.
MUSIC 431 Band Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Musical and practical aspects of band conducting. Prerequisite: A conducting course or substantial conducting experience.
MUSIC 432 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 434 The Organ and Its Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 435 Vocal Pedagogy I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A comprehensive study of vocal techniques, and methods of vocal training in “classical singing,” including the physicality of the instrument. Prerequisites: MUSIC 221 or 225, or 224, or equivalent.
MUSIC 436 Vocal Pedagogy II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A continuing study of vocal techniques, and methods of vocal training in “classical singing,” including the physicality of the instrument. Prerequisite: MUSIC 435.
MUSIC 438 Poetry and Performance of the German Lied Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-3L-0). Available only to students attending the summer master course of the Franz-Schubert-Institut in Baden bei Wien, Austria. Prerequisite: consent of Department and acceptance into the Franz-Schubert- Institut program. MUSIC 438 is graded on a CR/NC basis.
MUSIC 439 Vocal and Instrumental Chamber Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 440 Choral Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Concert Choir or Madrigal Singers. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 441 Instrumental Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Wind Ensemble, University Symphony Orchestra, Concert Band, or Guitar Ensemble. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on audition.
MUSIC 442 Specialized Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department based upon audition.
MUSIC 443 Indian Music Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). The classical music of India, through group instruction in singing, table (drums), sitar (plucked lute), sarangi (bowed lute), bansuri (flute), harmonium, ensemble performance, and related readings, films and discussions. A set of instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: MUSIC 143 or consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 444 West African Music Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Polyphonic and polyrhythmic music of West Africa, through ensemble performance of the percussion and vocal music of the Ewe people of Ghana, and related readings, films and discussions. A set of Ewe percussion instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: MUSIC 144 or consent of the Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 445 Electroacoustic Music Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3L-0). Electroacoustic music techniques, history and repertoire. Prerequisite: consent of department. Registration priority will be given to BMus (all routes), BA (Honors) Music Major, BEd Music Major/Minor, BA Music Major and graduate students in Music.
MUSIC 446 Opera Workshop =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). The coaching and staging of opera literature. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 447 Conducting Ensembles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Graduate Choral Conductors’ Ensemble (Vocal), Graduate Choral Conductors’ Ensemble (Instrumental), or Graduate Recital Choir. Prerequisite: Consent of Department, based on audition. Note: Does not fulfill large-ensemble requirements in BMus (all routes) and BMus/BEd programs.
MUSIC 448 Middle Eastern and North African Music Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). The study of Middle Eastern and North African vocal and instrumental music (primarily Arab, Persian, and Turkish musical traditions) through group instruction and ensemble performance, and related readings, films, and discussions. The ability to read music is not required. Some traditional instruments will be available. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: MUSIC 148 or consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 449 Jazz Ensembles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Jazz Band I, or Jazz Band II. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on audition.
MUSIC 451 Aural and Keyboard Skills III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). The development of advanced musicianship skills. Prerequisites: MUSIC 250 or 256, and 251, or equivalent.
MUSIC 455 Music Theory V Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Theories of art music composed between 1900 and 1950. Prerequisite: MUSIC 256. Not to be taken by students with credit in MUSIC 256 prior to 2008.
MUSIC 457 String Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 458 Music Theory Vll Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theories of art music composed after 1950. Not to be taken by students with credit in MUSIC 455 prior to 2008. Prerequisite: MUSIC 455 taken in 2008 or later.
MUSIC 463 Orchestration Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A detailed study of orchestration and its historical developments. Prerequisite: MUSIC 263.
MUSIC 465 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 466 Topics in Ethnomusicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 467 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: India and South Asia =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 468 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: The Arab World =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 469 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: Music and Islam =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses the sonic practices of Islamic rituals, Muslim discourses about music, and the relation of both to the rich diversity of religious and musical practices in Muslim societies around the globe. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 470 Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tutorial instruction in either acoustic or electronic free composition. Public performance of compositions is required. Prerequisite: MUSIC 260 (or equivalent) and consent of the Department based on portfolio review. Pre or corequisite: MUSIC 263. Registration priority given to BMus, BA (Honors) Music Major, BEd Music Major/Minor, and BA Music Major students.
MUSIC 471 Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tutorial instruction in either acoustic or electronic free composition. Public performance of compositions is required. Prerequisite: MUSIC 470 and consent of the Department based on portfolio review. Pre or corequisite: MUSIC 445. Registration priority given to BMus, BA (Honors) Music Major, BEd.
MUSIC 472 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: Africa Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the music cultures of the African continent, including indigenous instruments, traditional and popular genres and styles, and social,economic, and political factors. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 473 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: The Persianate World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The music of Inner and Central Asia, with specific emphasis on areas inhabited by Persian-speaking peoples or broadly influenced by Persian literature and culture. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 480 Survey of Contemporary Repertoire Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of acoustic and/or electroacoustic repertoire from c. 1950. Co- or Prerequisite: MUSIC 256.
MUSIC 481 Studies in Avant-Garde Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Co- or prerequisite: MUSIC 455.
MUSIC 482 Studies in Music and Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 483 Studies in Musical Genre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 484 Studies in Music and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 485 Composer Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 487 Period Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 488 Studies in Music and Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The intersections of music and filmmaking studies from academic, analytical, historical and critical perspectives. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 489 Studies in Music and Identity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of music and its technologies in constructing, enacting,and contesting collective and individual. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 492 Contemporary Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Performance and coaching experience in a range of 20thcentury and contemporary repertoires. Prerequisite: consent of the Department based on audition.
MUSIC 493 Experimental Improvisation Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Improvised, experimental music explored through creative exercises, group instruction and performance. No formal training is required. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 501 Music History Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 504 Honors Essay Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Restricted to BA Honors Music major students.
MUSIC 505 Bibliography and Methods of Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Registration priority given to MA students in music, MMus, BMus (Music History), BMus (World Music), and BA (Honors) Music Major students. If space remains, restricted to BMus (all routes) students only.
MUSIC 506 Tutorial Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Independent research in a specific area of the student’s interest. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 508 Seminar on Music in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 522 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 524 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisites: MUSIC 424 or equivalent and consent of Department.
MUSIC 525 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes) students.
MUSIC 526 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six half -hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition. Not to be taken by students with credit in MUSIC 520.
MUSIC 527 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 1-0-0). For non-BMus students. Twenty-six one-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 532 Second Practical Subject Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Restricted to BMus (all routes), BMus/BEd, and BEd students majoring in secondary music education. Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 545 Seminar in Computer Applications to Music Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Computer applications used in various genres, including acoustic and algorithmic composition, music notation, analysis, live electronics, electroacoustic/acousmatic music, and sound ecology. Prerequisites: Music 445 or equivalent or consent of Department.
MUSIC 546 Opera Workshop =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). The coaching and staging of opera literature. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 555 Issues in Theory and Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 455 or 456.
MUSIC 556 Seminar in Music Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisites: MUSIC 256 and consent of Department.
MUSIC 570 Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tutorial instruction in either acoustic or electronic free composition. Public performance of compositions is required. Prerequisite: MUSIC 471(or equivalent) and consent of the Department based on portfolio review. Normally, MUSIC 570 is available only to students in the Composition and Theory Route of the BMus program.
MUSIC 571 Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Tutorial instruction in either acoustic or electronic free composition. Public performance of works is required. Prerequisite: MUSIC 570 (or equivalent) and consent of the Department based on portfolio review. Normally, MUSIC 571 is available only to students in the Composition and Theory Route of the BMus.
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for credit by graduate students: MUSIC 321, 322, 403, 404, 433, 434,435, 436, 445, 501, 502, 505, 507, 508, 525, 533, 534, 535, 542, 545, 555, 556, 570,571.
MUSIC 509 Advanced Vocal Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An extensive study of art song and concert repertoire composed for solo voice. Course format is seminar- and performance-based.
MUSIC 510 Advanced Vocal Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A continuation of the study of art song and concert repertoire composed for solo voice. Course format is seminar-and performance- based. Prerequisite: MUSIC 409.
MUSIC 513 Topics in the History of Jazz Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MUSIC 538 Poetry and Performance of the German Lied Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-3L-0). Available only to students attending the summer master course of the Franz-Schubert-Institut in Baden bei Wien, Austria. Prerequisite: consent of Department and acceptance into the Franz-Schubert- Institut program. Music 538 is graded on a CR/NC basis.
MUSIC 543 Indian Music Ensemble V =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). The classical music of India, through group instruction in singing, tabla (drums), sitar (plucked lute), sarangi (bowed lute), bansuri (flute), harmonium, ensemble performance, and related readings, films, and discussions. A set of instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 544 West African Music Ensemble V =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Polyphonic and polyrhythmic music of West Africa, through ensemble performance of the percussion and vocal music of the Ewe people of Ghana, and related readings, films, and discussions. A set of Ewe percussion instruments will be available. The ability to read music is not required. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on assessment in the first class.
MUSIC 547 Conducting Ensembles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Graduate Choral Conductors’ Ensemble (Vocal), Graduate Choral Conductors’ Ensemble (Instrumental), or Graduate Recital Choir. Prerequisite: Consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 548 Middle Eastern and North African Music Ensemble V =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). The study of Middle Eastern and North African vocal and instrumental music (primarily Arab, Persian, and Turkish musical traditions) through group instruction and ensemble performance, and related readings, films, and discussions. The ability to read music is not required. Some traditional instruments will be available. Course may be repeated where topics vary. Prerequisite: consent of Department
MUSIC 549 Jazz Ensembles =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Jazz Band I, or Jazz Band II. Prerequisite: consent of Department based on audition.
MUSIC 557 Advanced Studies in String Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 558 Advanced Theories of Music After 1950 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
MUSIC 565 Area Studies in Ethnomusicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 365 or consent of Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
MUSIC 566 Topics in Ethnomusicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 365 or consent of
Department.
MUSIC 567 Advanced Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: India and South Asia =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 568 Advanced Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: The Arab World =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 569 Advanced Area Studies in Ethnomusicology: Music and Islam =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Addresses the sonic practices of Islamic rituals, Muslim discourses about music, and the relation of both to the rich diversity of religious and musical practices in Muslim societies around the globe. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 572 Advanced Studies in Ethnomusicology: Africa Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the music cultures of the African continent, including indigenous instruments, traditional and popular genres and styles, and social,economic, and political factors. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 573 Advanced Studies in Ethnomusicology: The Persianate World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The music of Inner and Central Asia, with specific emphasis on areas inhabited by Persian-speaking peoples or broadly influenced by Persian literature and culture. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 580 Advanced Contemporary Repertoire Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of acoustic and/or electroacoustic repertoire from c. 1950. Co- or Prerequisite: MUSIC 256.
MUSIC 581 Advanced Studies in Avant-Garde Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 256.
MUSIC 582 Advanced Studies in Music and Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 583 Advanced Studies in Musical Genre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 584 Advanced Studies in Music and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 585 Advanced Composer Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 587 Advanced Period Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 588 Advanced Studies in Music and Film Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The intersections of music and filmmaking studies from academic, analytical, historical and critical perspectives. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 589 Advanced Studies in Music and Identity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of music and its technologies in constructing, enacting,and contesting collective and individual. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 601 Tutorial Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 602 Tutorial Study Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1.5-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 603 Practicum in Piano Teaching Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-3). Prerequisite: MUSIC 304 or consent of Department.
MUSIC 604 Piano Pedagogy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 304 or consent of Department.
MUSIC 614 Proseminar in Musicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An overview of history, methodologies, and current issues in musicology. Prerequisite: MUSIC 505.
MUSIC 615 Seminar in Musicology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 621 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0).
MUSIC 623 Supplementary Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (two term, 0.5-0-0). Twenty-six half-hour lessons for two terms. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 624 Supplementary Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (either term, 1-0-0). Thirteen one-hour lessons for one term. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 625 Applied Music Œ3 (fi 9) (variable, 2-0-0). Thirteen hours of lessons over either the fall term or over two terms, plus attendance at weekly repertoire class.
MUSIC 630 Choral Conducting Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 631 Advanced Band Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced musical and practical aspects of band conducting. Prerequisite: MUSIC 431 or equivalent, or substantial conducting experience, and consent of the Department.
MUSIC 632 Advanced Wind Band Conducting Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 2-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 431 or equivalent, or substantial conducting experience, and consent of the Department.
MUSIC 633 Seminar in Choral Literature I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 634 Seminar in Choral Literature II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 635 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 636 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 635 and consent of Department.
MUSIC 638 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 630.
MUSIC 639 Vocal and Instrumental Chamber Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department, based upon audition.
MUSIC 640 Choral Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Concert Choir or Madrigal Singers. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based upon audition.
MUSIC 641 Instrumental Ensemble =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Wind Ensemble, University Symphony Orchestra, Concert Band, or Guitar Ensemble. Prerequisite: consent of Department based upon audition.
MUSIC 645 Seminar in Computer Music Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Application and programming of computer music software. Prerequisites: MUSIC 445 or equivalent, or consent of Department.
MUSIC 646 Opera Workshop =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). The coaching and staging of opera literature. Prerequisite: consent of Department, based on audition.
MUSIC 650 Proseminar in Music Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 651 Seminar in Music Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 653 Seminar in History of Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 660 Advanced Composition I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0).
MUSIC 661 Advanced Composition II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 660.
MUSIC 665 Issues in Ethnomusicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 666 Field Methods in Ethnomusicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
MUSIC 692 Contemporary Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Performance and coaching experience in a range of 20thcentury and contemporary repertoires. Prerequisite: consent of the Department based on audition.
MUSIC 693 Experimental Improvisation Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Improvised, experimental music explored through creative exercises, group instruction and performance. No formal training is required. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
MUSIC 699 Directed Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
MUSIC 721 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0).
MUSIC 725 Applied Music Œ6 (fi 15) (two term, 2-0-0). Twenty-six hours of lessons over two terms, plus one hour of repertoire class per week.
MUSIC 730 Choral Conducting Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 735 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 736 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
MUSIC 738 Choral Conducting Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 730.
MUSIC 739 Special Projects in Chamber Music Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-2L-0). Restricted to Doctor of Music students.
MUSIC 740 Choral Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Concert Choir or Madrigal Singers. Prerequisite: consent of Department based upon audition. Restricted to Doctor of Music students.
MUSIC 741 Instrumental Ensemble Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). Wind Ensemble, University Symphony Orchestra, Concert Band, or Guitar Ensemble. Prerequisite: consent of Department based upon audition. Restricted to Doctor of Music students.
MUSIC 746 Opera Workshop Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-4L-0). The coaching and staging of opera literature. Prerequisite: consent of Department based upon audition. Restricted to Doctor of Music students.
MUSIC 760 Advanced Composition III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Restricted to DMus Composition students.
MUSIC 761 Advanced Composition IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: MUSIC 760. Restricted to DMus Composition students.
MUSIC 903 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). This is a pass/fail course.
MUSIC 906 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned). This is a pass/fail course.
MUSIC 909 Directed Research Project Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, unassigned). This is a pass/fail course.
#
Nanotechnology and Nanoscience
NANO
Faculty of Engineering
Graduate Courses
NANO 500 Nanotechnology and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Overview of nanotechnology fundamentals and methodologies, including origins and implications of multidisciplinary aspects; areas of established and potential applications and markets. Implications in environment, health, and safety; regulation and legal status of nanotechnologies; national and international standards. Intellectual property and commercialization; social implications and acceptance.
#
Native Studies
NS
Faculty of Native Studies
Undergraduate Courses
NS 103 Canadian Indigenous Language Immersion for Adult Beginners Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An introduction to a Canadian indigenous language in an immersion context. No prior knowledge of the focus language is assumed. Note: This course cannot be used as a substitute for NS 152 nor does it prepare the student for NS 105. A student completing this course may still earn credit in NS 152 at a later date. Not for credit in Faculty of Native Studies degree programs.
NS 110 Historical Perspectives in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A thematic introduction to the historical relationships, colonial contexts, and social, economic, political and cultural patterns that have shaped the contemporary situation of Aboriginal peoples in Canada. Not open to students with credit in NS 210. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 111 Contemporary Perspectives in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory survey of current issues affecting Aboriginal peoples in Canada and their efforts to confront their colonial relationships with and within Canadian society. Not open to students with credit in NS 211. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 152 Introductory Cree =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 4-0-1). A general introduction to Plains Cree (Y dialect) grammar and vocabulary, with practice in speaking and work in the language laboratory. No prior knowledge of Cree is assumed. Not open to students with matriculation standing in Cree. Note: Students cannot receive credit for NS 152 and NS 153.
NS 190 Academic Writing and Research in the Context of Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to research and writing skills necessary in an academic environment, with an emphasis on how these methods are used in the discipline of Native Studies. Enrollment by Faculty consent only.
NS 200 Aboriginal Canada: Looking Forward/Looking Back =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). For students from faculties outside the Faculty of Native Studies with an interest in acquiring a basic familiarity with Aboriginal/ non-Aboriginal relationships, particularly those in Alberta. Consists of a survey of historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal peoples and newcomers, with the aim of expanding the understandings held by many Canadians about these relationships. Not designed for Native Studies majors. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 201 Aboriginal Canada: Looking Forward/Looking Back Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). For students from faculties outside the Faculty of Native Studies with an interest in acquiring a basic familiarity with Aboriginal/ non-Aboriginal relationships. Consists of a survey of historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal peoples and newcomers, with the aim of expanding the understandings held by many Canadians about these relationships. This course will be delivered online. Not open to students with credit in NS 200. Not designed for Native Studies majors. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 221 Our Land, Our Life: Dene Self-Determination In Theory and In Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This land-based hands-on course explores through the lens of Indigenous political theorists the historical and ongoing movement for Dene self-determination in Denendeh (NWT), and the processes of colonization and decolonization, land-claims and colonizer-First Nations relationships. Hunting, fish netting and moose hide tanning ground theory in protocols and practice of Dene Laws. Co-taught by professors, leaders and Elders at Dechinta Bush University only. Pre-requisite: Consent of the Faculty
NS 222 Dene Chanie: Dene Leadership That Path That We Walk Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This land-based hands-on course explores the Dene leadership approach of Dene Chanie as it applies to critical leadership challenges in Indigenous communities, particularly, but not limited to a Dene context. Hunting, fish netting and moose hide tanning ground theory in protocols and practice of Dene Laws and leadership practices. Prerequisites: consent of the Faculty.
NS 240 Introduction to Aboriginal Legal Issues =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to give students an introduction to the development of Aboriginal rights law in Canada. It examines the colonial context of Canadian constitutional law, identifies sources of Aboriginal law, discusses the Treaty and Aboriginal rights and the nature of the fiduciary obligations of the Crown to Aboriginal peoples. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 252 Intermediate Cree =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-1). Introduction to more complex grammatical structures; translation to and from Cree; reading of selected texts; oral practice, including conversation and work on individual projects. Prerequisite: NS 152 or 153.
NS 260 Contemporary Native Art =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the study of contemporary North American Native artists with emphasis on the philosophical and cultural statements made through their artistic expression. Special attention will be placed on living Canadian Native artists.
NS 280 Selected Topics in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
NS 290 Introduction to Research and Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Basic research skills and concepts required in Native Studies will be developed by exploring secondary sources.
NS 300 Traditional Cultural Foundations I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to the diversity of North American Native peoples. Native traditions are treated as aspects of dynamic cultural systems that have enabled Native peoples to survive and thrive in the centuries prior to European arrival, to resist assimilation efforts, and to persist as culturally distinct peoples. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 314 History of Indians of Western Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the evolution of Indian/European and Canadian relations in western Canada. Emphasis is on Indian historical perspectives and analyzing events and issues relevant to the various Indian groups of western Canada, including treaties and the history and development of reserves. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 320 Aboriginal Governments and Politics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The description, analysis, and principles of various Aboriginal governments will be examined. The relative merits of constitutional, legislative, and administrative options for realizing Aboriginal self-government will be compared. A study of the international and Canadian examples of local and regional Aboriginal governments in practice will be an important focus of this course. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 330 Native Economic Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will review underlying factors which affect the economies of Native communities and examine different approaches to Native Economic development, including community, corporate and entrepreneurial business approaches. The Native perspective to Native Economic Development will be a principal theme. The objective of the course will be to assess approaches to the identification, planning, and implementation of economic development strategies for Native communities. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 335 Native People and the Fur Trade =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Perspectives on the economic, cultural, and geographical aspects of the Native fur trade will be explored and examined critically. The influence of the changing relationships between Aboriginal peoples and mercantile trading interests will be assessed through lectures and seminars. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290, or consent of the Faculty.
NS 340 Aboriginal Legal Issues =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A critical overview of Aboriginal legal issues, with particular reference to Alberta and the Northwest Territories. Includes an introduction to customary law and emphasizes the Constitution Acts of Canada, selected federal and provincial legislation, treaties, and major court cases. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 345 Management Issues in Native Communities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course introduces the major management issues commonly faced by contemporary Native communities, public administration, and business organizations as a result of their unique cultural, social, economic, demographic, and political environment. Students will acquire an orientation to the management process and to modern management theory and practices. In addition, opportunities will be made to develop and practice the managerial skills involved in diagnosis, analysis and resolution of management issues frequently encountered in Native organizations. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 352 Advanced Cree Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-1). An intensive course designed to enable students to acquire considerable facility both in oral communication and in writing, employing both Roman and syllabic orthography. Prerequisite: NS 252.
NS 355 Native Oral Traditions and Indigenous Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course considers oral traditions as aspects of broader, culturally-defined systems of knowledge, in which stories are vehicles for encoding and transmitting knowledge about the people, their culture, and their history. It focuses on new academic and community-based approaches, as well as the complementarity of oral traditions/Indigenous knowledge and Western science. Students will explore the evolving roles of oral traditions for contemporary Native peoples. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 362 Aboriginal Women Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary approach to understanding historical and contemporary experiences of Aboriginal women. Examines the ways in which Aboriginal women have resisted and been shaped by colonialism and other contemporary racialized gendered practices through an exploration of community, race, gender, sexuality, identity, representation, and activism. The course also considers the ways in which Indigenous knowledge shape alternative ways of conceptualizing and politicizing history, identity, place, self-determination, land rights, resources and wellbeing. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 370 The Métis: The Emergence of a People =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the factors responsible for the emergence of Métis communities in different areas at different times, with the emphasis on Canada. The development of Métis people together with lifestyles that serve to distinguish them from others will receive much attention. Where applicable, comparisons with similar experiences elsewhere in the world will be made. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 372 Métis Politics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of various Métis political debates: identity, recognition, nationalism, political organizing, self-governance structures, constitutionalization of rights, and theories of Indigenous politics. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 376 Native Demography and Disease =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the historic epidemic diseases that devastated Native communities following the arrival of Europeans in this hemisphere. Students will study evidence for health and disease and for the size of the Native population before contact, the epidemiology and impacts of infectious diseases that accompanied Europeans to the Americas, and the transition to a different disease profile in the 20th century. Native and European approaches to well-being and disease will be considered. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 380 Selected Topics in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 240 or 290 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 390 Research Methods in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A survey of different disciplinary methods for conducting Native Studies research and data analysis, this course will also review and critique strategies and techniques applied by social science researchers with Indigenous peoples. Prerequisites: NS 110, 111 and 290 or consent of Faculty.
NS 403 Selected Topics in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: One 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty. Sections may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 404 Selected Topics in Native Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: One 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty.
NS 405 Selected Topics in International Indigenous Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: One 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty.
NS 406 Directed Readings in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Consent of the Faculty.
NS 420 Negotiation Strategies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An exploration of the theory and practice of negotiation and mediation from different perspectives, including perspectives from the dominant society and Indigenous peoples. The strategies of litigation, and coercion to overcome conflict and achieve settlements of disputes will also be examined. These negotiation theories will then be applied to concrete dispute situations in Canada, including multi-party disputes over land, governance, development of resources and the environment. This course will be taught in a seminar format. Prerequisite: *3 in any NS 300 level or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 430 Aboriginal Governance and Partnership Capstone Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course synthesizes and integrates the range of knowledge and analysis from previous Aboriginal governance courses, and normally includes a practical component to enhance the interplay of the theory and actual practice of governance. Prerequisites: *6 from the list of required and elective courses for the Certificate in Aboriginal Governance and Partnership [refer to the Native Studies Certificates section of the calendar], or consent of the Faculty. NS 390 is also recommended. Students intending to complete the Certificate in Aboriginal Governance and Partnership should complete all other Certificate requirements first. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 435 Management of Aboriginal Natural Resources =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of knowledge of resource management to the traditional Native economic activities, especially hunting, fishing and trapping. Conservation problems that developed with the spread of the commercial economy will be analyzed by examining Aboriginal and European approaches to resource management. The uses of conservation to rationalize the re-allocation of traditional resources are examined. Prerequisites: Any *6 in HGP 250, 355, REN R 205, 260 or AUGEO 324, or one 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 440 Indigenous Treaties and Agreements =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An exploration of the historical and contemporary issues associated with treaties. Pre- and post-1867 Indian treaties and modern agreements in Canada will be examined. Prerequisite: One 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty.
NS 441 Indigenous Land Claims and Agreements =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An exploration of the historical and contemporary issues associated with Indigenous land claims agreements. The background negotiations, and implementation of modern agreements in Canada will be the focus of this course. Prerequisite: One 300-level NS course or consent of the Faculty. NS 440 is also recommended.
NS 476 Perspectives on Aboriginal Health and Well-Being Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A critical overview of the literature and contemporary health issues affecting Aboriginal peoples in Canada. Special focus is on the meanings of health, socio-economic and environmental determinants of health and the socio-political landscape of Aboriginal health research and healthcare policy. Prerequisites: NS 376 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 490 Community-Based Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar exploring the issues in the area of community-based research. The course will be organized primarily around the examination of case studies. Methodological concerns will focus on the political, cultural, ethical, and practical aspects of conducting community-based research in conjunction with Native groups and communities. Prerequisite: NS 390.
NS 498 Honors Paper or Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). For students in the Honors program in Native Studies in their final year. Prerequisite: NS 390.
NS 499 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). The research project is designed to provide students with a variety of options for carrying out their own research. The specific route taken will depend upon the resources of the Faculty, opportunities available in the community, and the skills of the student. While the program is intended to be flexible, the main route around which students may design their projects will be research conducted in conjunction with a local Aboriginal organization or community. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty of Native Studies. Normally consent will not be given without credit in NS 390.
Graduate Courses
NS 503 Directed Readings in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Sections may require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NS 504 Directed Advanced Readings in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: NS 503 or consent of the Faculty.
NS 520 Theoretical Perspectives in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar introduces students to the history of and various theoretical concepts deemed important to the discipline of Native Studies.
NS 550 Research Practicum in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students must undertake a 30-hour research project in consultation with an Aboriginal organization or community chosen in coordination with the Practicum Coordinator.
NS 590 Community-Based Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar explores issues in the area of community-based research using case studies and teaches some relevant field research skills using hands-on exercises. Methodological concerns focus on the political, cultural, ethical and practical aspects of conducting community-based research in conjunction with Native groups and communities.
NS 591 Community-Based Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar explores issues in the area of community-based research using case studies and teaches some relevant field research skills using hands-on exercises. Methodological concerns focus on the political, cultural, ethical and practical aspects of conducting community-based research in conjunction with Native groups and communities.
NS 592 Archival and Historical Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students will gain an in-depth understanding of archival research, along with an exposure to the use of computers to capture, compile, analyze and present archival information.
NS 593 Social Survey Design and Analysis for Aboriginal Communities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students will learn research design and data collection strategies useful for small-scale quantitative research in Aboriginal communities. Survey research techniques, questionnaire construction and analysis will be emphasized.
NS 599 Selected Research Topics in Native Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute
NEURO
Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Note: Additional courses in Neuroscience are offered by members of the Centre for Neuroscience through individual departments such as Cell Biology, Pharmacology, Physiology, Psychiatry, Psychology, Surgery, and Zoology.
Undergraduate Courses
NEURO 210 Introduction to Clinical Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary course designed to introduce students to the field of clinical neuroscience. Students will learn the main features of degenerative brain diseases (such as Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis), developmental disorders of the brain (such as autism), psychiatric disorders (depression, schizophrenia and obsessive compulsive disorder), and brain injury (trauma, stroke and spinal cord injury). Key concepts attempting to explain these disorders in terms of underlying genetic, cellular and cognitive mechanisms will be emphasized. Prerequisite: PSYCO 275.
NEURO 375 Functional Neuroanatomy =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The study of the human central nervous system (CNS), including its development and function from an anatomical perspective. The course will include some disorders of the CNS as they relate to structure and function. Prerequisite: PSYCO 275 or consent of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute. Credit may be obtained for either ANAT 401 or NEURO 375 but not both.
NEURO 410 Neurobiology of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Designed to provide senior undergraduate students in the Neuroscience program a comprehensive overview of the neurobiology of normal aging and neurodegenerative disorders. Both clinical and basic science aspects of major neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington disease, Prion disease and Motor neuron disease (ALS) will be covered. Video presentations of patients with neurodegenerative disorders will be presented to add clinical and psychological dimensions. Additionally, recent papers reporting new developments in each of the above disorders will be discussed. Invited lectures will be given by national/international experts on aspects of neurodegenerative disorders to amplify topics covered in the course. Prerequisites: PMCOL 371 or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained for either NEURO 410 or 510 but not both.
NEURO 443 Neuroendocrine Concepts =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Regulation within the neuroendocrine system. Conceptual consideration of the diffuse neuroendocrine system, hypothalamopituitary interactions, neural integration, signal inactivation, feedback control, differential regulation, neurosteroids and hormones and behavior. Prerequisite: PHYSL 210 or equivalent, or PHYSL 372 or consent of Instructor.
NEURO 450 Readings on Selected Topics in Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). An individual study course involving detailed reading on a selected topic in cellular, molecular, systems, or cognitive neuroscience. Students will select a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI) who will guide them through a course of reading on a specialized topic at an advanced level. Completion of this course requires an oral presentation to an examining committee. Restricted to students in the Honors program in Neuroscience. Registration must be approved by the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Prerequisites: PMCOL 371, PHYSL 372.
NEURO 451 Honors Research Project in Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). Research project involving laboratory experimentation done under the supervision of a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Laboratory projects may involve current topics and methodologies encountered in specific areas of cellular, molecular, systems, or cognitive neuroscience. Completion of this course requires a written report of the project and an oral presentation to an examining committee. Restricted to students in the Honors program in Neuroscience. Registration must be approved by the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Prerequisites: PMCOL 371, PHYSL 372.
NEURO 452 Honors Research Project in Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-3). Research project involving laboratory experimentation done under the supervision of a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Laboratory projects may involve current topics and methodologies encountered in specific areas of cellular, molecular, systems, or cognitive neuroscience. Completion of this course requires a written report of the project and an oral presentation to an examining committee at the end of the course. Restricted to students in the Honors program in Neuroscience. Registration must be approved by the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Prerequisites: PMCOL 371, PHYSL 372.
NEURO 472 Autonomic Nervous System =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Lectures presented by members of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI) on neurophysiological, anatomical, clinical, pharmacological and cellular aspects of the autonomic nervous system. Topics include neural regulation of homeostasis and reproduction, disorders of autonomic function, sympathetically maintained pain, effects of spinal cord injury and current research issues. Prerequisites: PHYSL 210 or 212/214 or ZOOL 241 or equivalent and PMCOL 202 or 371 or ZOOL 342 or PHYSL 372.
NEURO 496 Computational Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3L-0). An interdisciplinary course designed to introduce students in biological science programs (Biology, Neuroscience, Kinesiology, Physiology and Psychology) to computational neuroscience, and students in computer science programs to the broad field of neuroscience. Biological science students will learn the basic methods of computer programming, while computer science students will learn the fundamentals of neuroscience. All students will learn how computer simulations can be used to further our understanding of neurons, neuronal networks, processing of sensory information, and control of movements. The lectures are complemented by laboratory exercises that will allow students to develop programming skills and to construct computer simulations of neurophysiological processes. Prerequisites: PMCOL 371 or PHYSL 372 or CMPUT 340 or PEDS 302 or permission of instructor. Credit may be obtained in one of NEURO 496 or CMPUT 470.
NEURO 498 Honors Research Project in Neuroscience I Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-0-6). Individual study and research. Honors research thesis completed under the supervision of a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Taken in conjunction with NEURO 499, this 6-credit course is the first part of a 12-credit program in two terms resulting in an honours research thesis in neuroscience. Students spend the term in the laboratory of a faculty member from the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI) to carry out a research project related to current topics and methodologies in the supervisor’s area of expertise in cellular, molecular, systems, or cognitive neuroscience. During NEURO 498 (Neuroscience I), students will develop background knowledge in an area of neuroscience research, design an experimental plan (in conjunction with their supervisor) to investigate a particular research question, learn the methodologies to be used, and begin experiments to answer this research question. Completion of this course requires a written proposal summarizing background information and experimental design and methods for the project as well as an oral presentation to an examining committee. Restricted to students in the Honors program in Neuroscience. Registration must be approved by the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Prerequisite: Consent of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI).
NEURO 499 Honors Research Project in Neuroscience II Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-0-6). Individual laboratory research. Part two of a honors research thesis completed under the supervision of a member of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Taken in conjunction with NEURO 498, this 6-credit course is the second part of a 12-credit program in two terms resulting in an honors research thesis in neuroscience. Upon satisfactory progress in first-term, NEURO 499 students will continue their research and produce a written honors thesis on their project. An oral presentation and thesis defense will occur at the end of term and be evaluated. Registration must be approved by the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI). Prerequisite: Consent of the Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute (NMHI).
Graduate Courses
NEURO 500 Research in Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). A practical course in the neurosciences where students spend two months in each of at least three research laboratories approved by the Centre for Neuroscience Graduate Committee. Students are expected to complete a small research project, supervised by a member of the Centre, in each of the research areas chosen. Students are evaluated on both their performance in the laboratory and reports written. Prerequisite: consent of the Centre for Neuroscience. Credit may be obtained for only one of either NEURO 500 or NEURO 501.
NEURO 501 Graduate Research Project =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Individual study. Restricted to students in the Neuroscience Graduate Program. Students will spend one term in the laboratory of a faculty member (other than the supervisor) and carry out a laboratory research project. Successful completion of a written report and an oral presentation is required at the conclusion of the project. Prerequisite: consent of the Centre for Neuroscience. Credit may be obtained for only one of either NEURO 500 or NEURO 501.
NEURO 510 Neurobiology of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Designed to provide graduate students in the Neuroscience program a comprehensive overview of the neurobiology of normal aging and neurodegenerative disorders. Both clinical and basic science aspects of major neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington disease, Prion disease and Motor neuron disease (ALS) will be covered. Video presentations of patients with neurodegenerative disorders will be presented to add clinical and psychological dimensions. Additionally, recent papers reporting new developments in each of the above disorders will be discussed. Invited lectures will be given by national/international experts on aspects of neurodegenerative disorders to amplify topics covered in the course. Students can receive credit for either NEURO 410 or 510 but not both. Prerequisites: PMCOL 371 or consent of instructor.
NEURO 572 Current Topics in Autonomic Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The neurophysiological, anatomical, clinical, pharmacological and cellular aspects of the autonomic nervous system will be studied. Students will also be expected to deliver a lecture-type presentation and an extensive written report on one aspect of autonomic function such as neural regulation of homeostasis, disorders of autonomic function, sympathetically maintained pain, autonomic consequences of spinal cord injury and current research issues. Note that credit is given for either NEURO 472 or 572, not for both. Prerequisite: Consent of the Centre for Neuroscience.
NEURO 603 Graduate Colloquium in Neuroscience =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-2s-0). Graduate students present review seminars or lead discussions based on required readings in the neurosciences. Coordinated by a member of the Centre for Neuroscience. Centre members are invited to attend. Graded on a pass/fail basis.
NEURO 621 The Art of Grant Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to train graduate students in preparing grant applications in order to improve their chances of future success in obtaining research funds from a major Canadian federal funding agency such as the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. The course is targeted primarily towards students who have completed at least one year of graduate work. Preference will be given to those planning to pursue a PhD. Throughout the course, students will be instructed on how to prepare a complete grant application package on a topic that is different from their graduate project. The proposal will be prepared in stages and completed two weeks prior to the end of the semester. Students will then prepare and give presentations for a mock site visit by the funding agency. Students will also participate in a mock peer review committee and make final funding decisions. Enrolment is limited, and registration is by permission of the Department.
#
Norwegian
NORW
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a Norwegian language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Scandinavian (SCAND).
Undergraduate Courses
NORW 111 Beginners’ Norwegian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Designed to give basic practical skill in everyday spoken and written Norwegian. The oral approach, using the laboratory, is followed.
Note: not to be taken by students with credit in NORW 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Norwegian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
NORW 112 Beginners’ Norwegian II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: NORW 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in NORW 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Norwegian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
NORW 211 Second-Year Norwegian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Reading and study of selected texts in Norwegian literature and culture. Conversation and composition. Prerequisite: Norwegian 30 (or equivalent) or NORW 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in NORW 200.
NORW 212 Second-Year Norwegian II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: NORW 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in NORW 200.
#
Nursing
NURS
Faculty of Nursing
Undergraduate Courses
NURS 103 Introduction to Nursing Theory Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). Focus is on the basic concepts of the nursing profession and discipline: nursing, person, health and environment. These concepts will be explored within the context of primary health care and changing perspectives of health and how this evolution has impacted the development of the profession of nursing. The philosophical, theoretical, historical, ethical and legal underpinnings of professional nursing practice will be examined. Corequisites: NURS 113 and 105. Note: Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 105 Introduction to Health Assessment Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, variable). Focus is on the health assessment of the well adult, with expected aging modifications. The course provides a beginning foundation of assessment skills and technologies necessary for determining client health status within the context of a nursing framework. Factors influencing lifestyles and personal health practices are included. Corequisites: NURS 113 and 103. Note: Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 113 Pathophysiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The focus is the application of human anatomy and physiology to the concepts of pathophysiology. Course content will be addressed within the context of underlying disease process and alterations in health. Prerequisites for Collaborative Program students: NURS 140 and 150. Must be completed prior to second year of the Collaborative Program. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both NURS 113 and 151. Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program and After Degree Program. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 140 Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the structure of the human body. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 150 Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to human physiology. Available only to Nursing students. Corequisite: NURS 140. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 151 Physiology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Continuation of the study of human physiology. Available only to nursing students. Prerequisites: NURS 140 and 150. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both NURS 113 and 151.
NURS 190 Nursing in Context A Œ5 (fi 10) (first term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). Introduction to the professional discipline of nursing, communication theory, and context-based learning. The primary health care emphasis is on health promotion and disease prevention across the life span. Restoration and rehabilitation are introduced. Health assessment and basic nursing skills are introduced.
NURS 191 Nursing Practice I Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 1-15c-2 in 7 weeks). Beginning nursing practice with a focus on health promotion and interaction with clients across the life span in a variety of non-traditional settings. Prerequisite: NURS 194.
NURS 194 Nursing in Context A1 Œ5 (fi 10) (first term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). A continuation of the study of concepts introduced in NURS 190 with a focus on teaching and learning principles and increased health assessment and basic nursing skills. Prerequisite: NURS 190.
NURS 195 Nursing Practice II Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 1-15c-2 in 7 weeks). Practice includes health status assessment of clients and appropriate health promotion and disease prevention interventions. Practice occurs in settings where clients live or in community agencies (non-acute) where services to clients are offered. Prerequisite: NURS 194.
NURS 201 Introduction to Nursing Theory II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Focuses on health promotion and support to individuals in the pursuit of health throughout their lives. A variety of concepts from nursing and other disciplines will be integrated into the overall learning. Students will be initiated into nursing roles with individuals in community, assisted living, and continuing care settings. Prerequisites: MMI 133, NURS 103, 105 and 113. Note: Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program.
NURS 202 Introduction to Nursing Practice Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-14C-0). This course introduces students to nursing practice. Practice focuses on individuals in community and continuing care settings. Prerequisites: MMI 133, NURS 103, 105 and 113. Corequisite: NURS 201. Note: Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program.
NURS 215 Pharmacotherapeutics in Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on the mechanisms of action of drugs, their therapeutic uses and side effect profile. General principles related to drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion will be addressed. The nursing role in promoting optimal therapeutic regimens and in the management of side/ adverse effects will be included. Prerequisites for Collaborative Program students: NURS 103, 105, and 113. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 290 Nursing in Context B Œ5 (fi 10) (first term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). Within the context of primary health care, the focus shifts to restoration, rehabilitation and support of clients experiencing chronic and less acute variances in health. Discussion related to health promotion and disease prevention continues. Intermediate health assessment and nursing skills are introduced. Prerequisites: MMI 133, NURS 151, 191, and 195.
NURS 291 Nursing Practice III Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 3-25c-3 in 7 weeks). Practice focuses on restoration, rehabilitation and support (including health promotion and disease prevention) of clients with chronic and less acute variances in health across the life span. Practice occurs primarily in primary-level acute care centres and continuing care agencies. Prerequisites: MMI 133, NURS 151,191, and195. Corequisite: NURS 290.
NURS 294 Nursing in Context B1 Œ5 (fi 10) (second term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). Continuation of NURS 290 with increasing situational complexity. Prerequisites: NURS 290 and (NURS 291 or 295).
NURS 295 Nursing Practice IV Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 3-25c-3 in 7 weeks). Practice focuses on health across the life-span in child-birth facilities, homes, community health clinics, schools and other community based settings. Integration of the concepts of primary health care, health promotion and disease prevention and determinants of health are examined in the community context. Prerequisites: MMI 133, NURS 151, 191, and 195. Corequisite: NURS 290.
NURS 301 Nursing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the process of research through a comparative analysis of selected studies exemplifying different theoretical, methodological, and analytical approaches. Emphasis is on the communicability of research, the needs of the research consumer, and the development of skills of critical appraisal. Prerequisites for Collaborative Program students: NURS 103, 105, and 113.
NURS 303 Introduction to Nursing Theory Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). Focus is on the basic concepts of the nursing profession and discipline: nursing, person, health and environment. These concepts will be explored within the context of primary health care and changing perspectives of health and how this evolution has impacted the development of the profession of nursing. The philosophical, theoretical, historical, ethical and legal underpinnings of professional nursing practice will be examined. Corequisites: NURS 113, 304, and 305. Note: Available only to nursing students in the After Degree Program. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 304 Introduction to Nursing Practice Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-4c-0 in 10 weeks). The primary focus is the application of theoretical nursing concepts introduced in NURS 303 and health assessment techniques introduced in NURS 305. This application is addressed within a Primary Health Care framework. Beginning practice will focus on clients experiencing less acute alterations in health across the lifespan. Corequisites: NURS 113, 303 and 305. Note: Available only to nursing students in the After Degree Program.
NURS 305 Introduction to Health Assessment Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, variable). Focus is on the health assessment of the well adult, with expected aging modifications. The course provides a beginning foundation of assessment skills and technologies necessary for determining client health status within the context of a nursing framework. Factors influencing lifestyles and personal health practices are included. Corequisites for After Degree Program students: NURS 113, 303 and 304. Corequisites for Bilingual Program students: SC INF 217 and 218. Note: Available only to nursing students in the After Degree Program and Bilingual Program. Students must achieve a minimum grade of C+ in order to progress in the program.
NURS 307 Acute Care Nursing Theory I Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). The primary focus is the theoretical foundation for the client-centred care of adults and older adults and their families experiencing variations in health (acute and chronic illnesses). Comprehensive assessment and best practice interventions are addressed within the context of a primary health care framework and a nursing model. For Collaborative Program students, prerequisites: NURS 201, 202 and 215; corequisite: NURS 308. For After Degree Program students, prerequisites: NURS 113, 303, 304, and 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 308. For RPN to BScN students, prerequisite: NURS 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 308. For Bilingual Program students, prerequisites: SC INF 217, 218, and NURS 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 308.
NURS 308 Acute Care Nursing Practice I Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-16c-0). The primary focus is the application of theory in the client-centred care of hospitalised adults and older adults and their families experiencing variations in health (acute and chronic illnesses). Practice occurs primarily in primary, secondary and tertiary acute care settings. For Collaborative Program students, prerequisites: NURS 201, 202, and 215; corequisite: NURS 307. For After Degree Program students, prerequisites: NURS 113, 303, 304, and 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 307. For RPN to BScN students, prerequisite: NURS 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 307. For Bilingual Program students, prerequisites: SC INF 217, 218, and NURS 305; corequisites: NURS 215 and 307.
NURS 309 Mental Health Nursing Theory Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). Focus is on theory related to the promotion of mental health and the nursing care of people with acute and chronic alterations in mental health. Prerequisites for Collaborative Program students: NURS 201, 202, and 215. Prerequisites for After Degree Program and Bilingual Program students: NURS 215, 307, and 308. Corequisite: NURS 310.
NURS 310 Mental Health Nursing Practice Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-24c-0 7w; 0-32c-0 5w). Students will have opportunity to apply concepts of mental health nursing to the care of individuals experiencing acute and chronic alterations in mental health in hospital or community settings. Prerequisites for Collaborative Program students: NURS 201, 202, and 215. Prerequisites for After Degree Program and Bilingual Program students: NURS 215, 307, and 308. Corequisite: NURS 309.
NURS 341 Using and Interpreting Statistics for Health Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to reading, understanding and interpreting commonly used statistics in published health sciences research. Provides hands-on approach to understanding measurement, sampling, and common statistical analysis techniques through critical appraisal of results from published health care studies. Note: NURS 341 and STAT [*3] may not both be taken for credit.
NURS 348 Junior Level Clinical Competency Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The focus is to promote client and student safety in the clinical setting by providing an assessment of clinical competence (skills and knowledge integration/application) and remediation as indicated by the assessment. This course provides students with opportunity to develop and refine clinical skills and nursing knowledge in a laboratory setting. The clinical competence assessment consists of a medication administration safety screen (MASS), Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCES) and patient care (in the simulation lab) and is designed for students entering a junior level clinical course (NURS 308, NURS 310).
NURS 390 Nursing in Context C Œ5 (fi 10) (first term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). Within the context of primary health care focus is on restoration, rehabilitation and support of clients experiencing more acute variances in health. Discussion related to health promotion and disease prevention continues. Advanced health assessment and nursing skills are introduced. Prerequisites: NURS 291, 294, and 295.
NURS 391 Nursing Practice V Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 3-26C-3/2 7 weeks). Practice focuses on restoration, rehabilitation, and support (including health promotion and disease prevention) of clients experiencing more acute variances in health across the life-span. Practice occurs in primary-, secondary-, and tertiary-level acute care settings. Prerequisites: NURS 291, 294, and 295. Corequisite: NURS 390.
NURS 394 Nursing in Context C1 Œ5 (fi 10) (second term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). Continuation of NURS 390 with increasing situational complexity. Prerequisites: NURS 390 and (391 or 395).
NURS 395 Nursing Practice VI Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 3-27c-1 in 7 weeks). Practice focuses on health promotion and disease prevention, restoration, rehabilitation and support of clients across the lifespan who are experiencing acute and chronic mental health issues. Practice occurs in acute care and/or community settings. Prerequisites: NURS 291, 294, and 295. Corequisite: NURS 390.
NURS 399 Selected Topics in Nursing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3s-0). The focus is on nursing research, nursing practice, and nursing as a discipline and a profession. Prerequisite: Consent of the Faculty.
NURS 405 Community Nursing Theory Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). Focus is on the philosophical and theoretical domains of nursing individuals, families and groups in the community across the lifespan. Students will also specifically explore theory related to the nursing care of the child-bearing family. Community nursing management and intervention consistent with the principles of primary health care will be explored and fostered. Prerequisites: NURS 215, 307 and 308. Corequisite: NURS 406 or SC INF 406.
NURS 406 Community Nursing Practice Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-16c-0). Students will have the opportunity to apply concepts of community health nursing. Nursing practice will include health assessment and interventions with child-bearing families. Students will develop competence in both family and community assessments, the use of therapeutic communication skills and the planning, implementation and evaluation of community nursing interventions. Prerequisites: NURS 215, 307 and 308. Corequisite: NURS 405.
NURS 407 Acute Care Nursing Theory II Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, variable). A comprehensive approach to primary health care components in the care of clients in complex situations locally, nationally, and internationally. High acuity health assessments and interventions are introduced. Case management, interdisciplinary collaboration, community development, and sociopolitical action are emphasized. Prerequisites: NURS 215, 307 and 308. Corequisite: NURS 408.
NURS 408 Acute Care Nursing Practice II Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-16c-0). Professional nursing practice focuses on a comprehensive application of primary health care principles to clients experiencing acute variances in health across the life span. Practice occurs in primary, secondary and tertiary level acute care settings. Prerequisites: NURS 215, 307 and 308. Corequisite: NURS 407.
NURS 409 Leadership and Issues in Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Using the primary health care framework, a variety of current professional, social, political and global issues affecting the nursing profession and the Canadian health care system will be addressed. Key principles of leadership and management will also be addressed within the context of these issues.
NURS 448 Senior Level Clinical Competency Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). The focus is to promote client and student safety in the clinical setting by providing an assessment of clinical competence (skills and knowledge integration/application) and remediation as indicated by the assessment. This course provides students with opportunity to develop and refine clinical skills and nursing knowledge in a laboratory setting. The clinical competence assessment consists of a medication administration safety screen (MASS), Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCES) and patient care (in the simulation lab) and is designed for students entering a senior level course (NURS 406, NURS 408, NURS 495).
NURS 490 Nursing in Context D Œ5 (fi 10) (either term, 1.5-6s-3 in 6 weeks). A comprehensive approach to primary health care components in the care of clients in complex, ambiguous situations. Case management and multidisciplinary leadership skills are emphasized. Students may have the opportunity to lead a multidisciplinary student group. Prerequisites: NURS 391, 394, and 395.
NURS 491 Nursing Practice VII Œ7 (fi 14) (either term, 3-26c-2 in 7 weeks). Management and care of clients in ambiguous, complex, situations occurring over a variety of settings. Prerequisites: NURS 391, 394 and 395. Corequisite: NURS 490.
NURS 494 Nursing in Context D1 Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-7s-3 in 4 weeks). Synthesis and focus of nursing knowledge and application of nursing research in a specified area of practice. To be permitted to enroll in this course, students must have passed all courses of their nursing program, except the corequisite NURS 495, or SC INF 495.
NURS 495 Nursing Practice VIII Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, 1-34c-0 in 10 weeks). Comprehensive and consolidated approach to professional practice of nursing. Corequisite: NURS 494. Note: Available only to nursing students in the Collaborative Program, Honors Program, After Degree Program, and RPN to BScN Program.
NURS 498 Special Study - Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (two term, variable).
NURS 499 Scholarly Project in Nursing Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-3s-0). Preparation and presentation of a nursing scholarly project. Prerequisites: NURS 399 and consent of the Faculty.
Graduate Courses
NURS 501 Advanced Nursing Practice in the Canadian Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-2). Students will be introduced to the roles and skills needed by advanced practice nurses in the Canadian health care system. Health assessment and psychomotor skills labs using equipment common in Canadian health care settings and discussion of nurse-client communication, health care ethics, and diverse nursing practice roles in both national and international settings comprise the key content. Discussion will also include challenges related to registration and licensure, role of the Internationally Educated Nurse and workplace integration and retention. The course cannot be taken in lieu of N510.
NURS 502 Nature of Nursing Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Inquiry into the nature, scope, and object of nursing knowledge and the distinct contribution of nursing art, philosophy, history, and science. Emphasis is placed on how this inquiry is relevant to nursing practice and includes an exploration of nursing theories/frameworks.
NURS 503 Research Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1c). In this course, students will learn to identify and defend a significant problem relevant to nursing practice, critically evaluate relevant previous research and frameworks to further explore the problem, develop a researchable question to address the problem and choose an appropriate research approach (design and data collection strategy) to answer the question. Ethical issues of relevance at each step in the research process will also be discussed. Credit for NURS 503 will only be granted once.
NURS 504 Statistics in Nursing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1L). The focus of this course is on the nature and characteristics of the most commonly used statistical techniques, their applicability to specific health care problems within the context of nursing, and the interpretation of results. Students will be given an opportunity to develop skills and knowledge in the use of computing software (SPSS) and to reinforce learning through assignments, including the analysis of data sets and discussion/ critique of published nursing research.
NURS 505 Transforming Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course involves theory and principles of transformative change related to individual performance, multidisciplinary teams, organizational processes, policy, and teaching / learning / pedagogy. Graduates are prepared, in advanced nursing practice roles, to lead individual, team, organizational, and system change in a healthcare or educational setting.
NURS 506 Program Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to perspectives and research in relation to planning of health promotion and disease prevention initiatives in a variety of practice settings. The focus of this course is implications for nursing and inter-professional practice related to assessment and evaluation. A foundation is provided for program planning, including health education, community organizing, social marketing, and policy advocacy. Theoretical content pertains to models and strategies relevant to multiple levels of client such as population, community, aggregate, or group.
NURS 507 Advanced Pharmacotherapeutics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Graduate seminar on the principles of pharmacotherapeutics and individual differences related to age, gender and clinical conditions. Specific drug classes chosen as having the widest use across nursing specialty areas will be used to illustrate application of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetic principles. The focus is on decision-making related to prescribing and monitoring. Lectures are augmented with presentations by content experts and case studies by clinicians. Prerequisite or corequisite: NURS 509.
NURS 508 Health Care Technology and Innovation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on the context of healthcare organizations and economics theory relevant to technology or innovation adoption.
NURS 509 Advanced Pathophysiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on in-depth knowledge of advanced pathophysiology relating to common variations in health across the lifespan. Students will gain an understanding of applied pathophysiology related to specific health problems in acute, chronic, and acute on chronic health conditions. Opportunities to discuss concepts and application of these to advanced clinical practice will be provided through seminars discussion.
NURS 510 Advanced Health Assessment and Applied Pathophysiology - Adult/Older Adult Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3s-12c-2). The focus of this course is on the development of advanced assessment and diagnostic reasoning skills for common variations in the health status of adults/older adults. Students will gain an understanding of advanced assessment and applied pathophysiology related to specific health problems in emergent to chronic health care situations. Opportunities to apply clinical diagnostic reasoning skills and decision making required for the assessment of adult/older adult health problems are provided through seminars, laboratory practice, and a clinical practicum. Prerequisite or corequisite: NURS 507 and NURS 509.
NURS 512 Quantitative Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1). The focus of this course is on quantitative research methods and on the nature and characteristics of the most commonly used statistical techniques in health research. Emphasis is given to the selection of appropriate methods and statistics to answer research questions; to data collection, analysis and interpretation of results; and to the appraisal of quantitative research literature. Attention is also given to knowledge synthesis, mixed method, ethics in research, and knowledge translation in advanced nursing practice.
NURS 513 Qualitative Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on qualitative research approaches and includes an introduction to the philosophical foundations of qualitative methods. Emphasis is placed on the selection of appropriate methods to answer research questions; on data collection, analysis and interpretation of results; and on the appraisal of qualitative research literature. Attention is also given to knowledge synthesis, mixed methods, ethics in research, and knowledge translation in advanced nursing practice.
NURS 514 Community and Organization Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1c). In this course students examine nursing assessment of organizations, communities and other populations as a foundation for advanced practice focused on health promotion within organizational and community settings. Course content includes use of data about community/organizational capacity, health status characteristics, and the causes and distribution of disease. Emphasis is placed on a socio-environmental approach to organizational assessment and community health, including the social determinants of health and disease.
NURS 515 Advanced Health Assessment and Applied Pathophysiology - Family / All Ages Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 3s-12c-2). The focus of this course is on the development of advanced assessment and diagnostic reasoning skills for common variations in the health status across the lifespan. Learners will gain an understanding of advanced assessment and applied pathophysiology related to specific health problems of all ages in primary care situations. Opportunities to apply clinical diagnostic reasoning skills and decision making required for the assessment of a variety of individual health problems are provided through seminars, laboratory practice, and a clinical practicum. Prerequisite or corequisite: NURS 507 and NURS 509.
NURS 536 Public Policy and Nursing Leadership: Conscience, Possibility and Action Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The purpose of this course is to critically analyze policy, politics, and sources of influence within the policy context. The policy process, including context, strategies, as well as the impact of policies on the health and social well-being of Canadians are examined. Emphasis is given to the advanced practice roles and nursing leadership both in public/social policy related to the broad social determinants of health, and health-oriented public policy. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in NURS 560 - Leadership Hlth/Nrsng
NURS 542 Living with Chronicity: Issues and Concepts Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students explore how persons with a chronic disease or disability and their families adapt to live with this disease or disability, how society influences that adaptation, and how that adaptation affects the integration of persons with a chronic disease or disability into society. Frameworks consistent with a health promotion perspective will also be examined.
NURS 546 Philosophy of Teaching Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-3s-9c). The focus of this course is the exploration of major philosophical positions and their contributions to the teaching learning process. Specifically, it involves an examination of the relationship between philosophical reflection and pedagogical practice within the context of nursing education. Students discuss basic world views that influence contemporary thought about the teaching learning process, critically analyze/deconstruct educational concepts, values and practices and explore how philosophy of teaching influences curricular development and shapes nursing education. Credit will not be granted to students who have previously received credit for NURS 560 - Philosophy of Teaching.
NURS 556 Teaching in Nursing Practice Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-3s-9c). Students will explore theories of learning and the related implications for effective educational endeavors in various contexts of nursing practice. The course will facilitate how learning outcomes in nursing practice are influenced by the orientation, characteristics, and actions of those who teach and learn, as well as the resources and constraints within each context where the teaching and learning processes occur.
NURS 560 Topics in Advanced Study in Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). An elective course aimed at developing in-depth knowledge regarding a topic(s) related to advanced-level nursing. Learning experiences may include clinical experience. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
NURS 561 Guided Individual Study in Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). A course designed for in-depth, individual study of a topic related to advanced-level nursing. Learning experiences may include clinical experience.
NURS 570 Advanced Therapeutics and Applied Pathophysiology - Adult/ Older Adult Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-3s-12c). The focus of this course is on the acquisition of advanced knowledge and skills essential for clinical decision making in the management of adults/older adults with various health problems. Opportunities are provided to implement and evaluate preventative and therapeutic interventions, as well as health promotion strategies in emergent to chronic health care situations through seminars and a clinical practicum. Prerequisite: NURS 510.
NURS 574 Health Practice in Communities and Organizations Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-3S-4C). Students will critically examine concepts and research in health promotion and disease prevention in organizational and community settings. Emphasis is given to implementations for inter-professional practice related to health education, organizational/community development, social marketing, policy advocacy and program evaluation, extending introductory content offered in NURS 514. Theoretical content pertains to models and intervention strategies relevant to multiple client groups such as communities/organizations, populations, small groups, or aggregates.
NURS 575 Advanced Therapeutics and Applied Pathophysiology - Family / All Ages Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-3s-12c). The focus of this course is on the acquisition of advanced knowledge and skills essential for clinical decision making in the management of individuals across the life span with various health problems. Opportunities are provided to implement and evaluate preventative and therapeutic interventions, as well as health promotion strategies in primary care situations through seminars and a clinical practicum. Prerequisite: NURS 515.
NURS 584 Advanced Theory and Practicum in Community / Health Care Organizations Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-2s-10c). This practicum is designed to integrate theoretical knowledge with experience and skill development in the context of community and health care system organization settings. Each student is matched with a mentor who currently occupies a leadership role in a health policy or delivery organization, including community and institutional settings. The mentor will facilitate student entry and experiences in the community and/or organizational context. Seminars and consultation with the Instructor provide opportunities to debrief practicum experiences and integrate theory and practice. Prerequisite: NURS 554 or equivalent.
NURS 586 Teaching Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-2s-34c). This practicum is designed to enhance contextual knowledge and skills relevant to teaching roles in nursing practice which may focus on basic and continuing nursing education, patient education in particular, or health education in general. Based on what is both personally and professionally relevant, each student develops an individualized learning plan and is paired with a teaching preceptor in the area of nursing practice appropriate for the student learning goals. Seminars provide a forum to critically reflect about how teaching and learning can be effectively practiced in the various teaching practicum interests the students bring to the course.
NURS 588 Research Practicum Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 0-2s-10c). In the research practicum the student will focus on the acquisition of practical research knowledge and skills. Each student will be assigned to work with one or more faculty mentors with established and active research programs. The faculty mentor(s) will work with the student to ensure an opportunity to participate in a range of research activities.
NURS 592 International and Intercultural Perspectives in Health and Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on relationships among health, development, and human resources for health. Emphasis will be placed on fostering an appreciation of the meaning of global, epidemiological, demographic, historical, socio-cultural, environmental, economic, and political contexts in relation to the health of populations, the development of nursing and health services, and the potential for achieving the Millennium Development Goals related to health. Credit will not be granted to students who have previously received credit for NURS 560 - International and Intercultural Perspectives in Health and Nursing.
NURS 600 Theory Development in Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Exploration of influence and implications of various nursing models, paradigms, and conceptualizations of nursing practice on the development and structure of the discipline of nursing. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
NURS 601 Advanced Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The purpose of this course is to foster advanced scholarly inquiry and to assist students to understand, position, and defend their research theoretically and methodologically in the context of multiple perspectives and different theoretical standpoints. Emphasis will be placed on the diverse but distinctive nature of nursing inquiry which is the systematic creating and/ or building of knowledge for the discipline of nursing through engagement of multiple communities within a health related context.
NURS 604 Fundamentals of Aging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical analysis of the issues and environments that influence the lives of older Canadians. Focus is on theories and knowledge about age-related normative and non-normative changes and their interaction with the physical, social, community and policy environments of older adults. (Course is cross-listed as HECOL 604). Credit will only be granted for NURS 604 or HECOL 604.
NURS 609 Synthesizing Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The objective of this course is to provide students with knowledge, methodological skills, and guidance through all steps of conducting a variety of systematic literature reviews. Topics include developing a research question, literature searching, managing references, selecting studies, quality assessment, data extraction, synthesizing evidence, heterogeneity, and interpretation of evidence. Readings and seminar discussions focus on critical judgment factors that reviewers must make to enhance rigor in their review. This course addresses reviews of quantitative and qualitative. It provides a foundation for those interested in conducting intensive qualitative or quantitative reviews. Prerequisites: A graduate course in Statistics and a graduate course in Research Design, and permission of the instructor.
NURS 610 Contemporary Views of Nursing Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Enquiry into contemporary philosophic views of the nature of nursing science including natural science, human science, practical science, interpretive, and postmodern views. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
NURS 660 Topics in PhD Studies in Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). A course aimed at developing in-depth knowledge regarding a topic(s) related to PhD-level nursing. Learning experiences may include clinical experience.
NURS 661 Guided Individual Study in Nursing Œ1-12 (variable) (either term, variable). A course designed for in-depth, individual study of a topic related to PhD-level nursing. Learning experiences may include clinical experience.
NURS 682 Statistics for Causal Analysis in Health Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1). This course presents foundational statistical tools for the analysis of social, behavioral, and health data. The focus will be on using these tools to overcome the challenges of inferring causality from observational data. This course requires advanced standing and builds upon the quantitative research design and statistics content from the graduate program in nursing or another health science. Students will refine skills with statistical software (SPSS). Learning will be reinforced through data analysis assignments.
NURS 683 Design Problems in Nursing Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Appraisal of laws of scientific inquiry and designs used in nursing research. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
NURS 684 History and Politics of Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Exploration of the roots of nursing through analysis of the development of the profession within the larger social context. Examines developments at individual and collective levels including selected organizations, events, and individuals central to the evolution of the profession. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
NURS 685 Migration and Health in the Canadian Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on critical analysis of issues related to migration and health in the Canadian context. Determinants of health are used as a framework to define relevant topics, explore theoretical perspectives, and incorporate knowledge from a variety of disciplines. Research challenges in conceptualization and implementation of immigrant health projects are explored. The concepts of cultural competence and cultural safety are examined in depth and implications for policy and research are explored.
NURS 686 International and Intercultural Perspectives in Health and Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this course is on relationships among health, development, globalization and human resources to reduce health inequities and foster social justice. Emphasis is placed on fostering an appreciation of the meaning of global, epidemiological, demographic, historical, socio-cultural, environmental, economic, and political contexts in relation to the changing pattern in health of populations, the development of nursing and/or other health professions and health services, the impact on delivery and planning of nursing/health care and the nursing/health professions response within the global context. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in NURS 660 - Int’l Health and Nursing
NURS 687 Advanced Principles and Practice of Qualitative Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course provides an advanced examination of the theoretical reasoning, methods and research strategies of specific approaches within contemporary qualitative inquiry. Students explore the key ontological and epistemological foundations that underlie different theoretical orientations and how different interpretations lead to differences in methods and research strategies. This course cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in NURS 660 - Adv Princ/Prac of Qual Inquiry
NURS 699 Dissertation Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5s-0). For PhD in Nursing students registration required for two consecutive terms. The seminar focus is on the doctoral students’ development as nurse scholars/researchers. It will include opportunities for discussion of the students’ proposed and ongoing research, and career development. Prerequisites: NURS 600, 601, 609, and INT D 690.
NURS 900 Guided Scholarly Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). A guided scholarly project which will focus on such areas as clinical outcomes, evidence-based practice, quality improvement, or knowledge diffusion.
#
Nutrition
NUTR
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS), Animal Science (AN SC), Interdisciplinary (INT D), Nutrition and Food Sciences (NU FS) and Plant Science (PL SC) listings for related courses.
The following courses were renumbered effective 1995-96.
Old New Old New
NU FS 301 NUTR 301 
NU FS 302 NUTR 302
Undergraduate Courses
NUTR 100 Nutrition and Wellbeing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of nutrition. The need for and functions of the major nutrients for humans. Cannot be taken by students with credit or currently registered in NU FS 305 or other NUTR courses. May contain alternative delivery sections: refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 201 Role of the Dietitian in the Canadian Health Care System Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to the profession of dietetics and its position with in the Canadian health care system. Topics covered include: history of dietetics; the structure of the health care system in Canada; roles of the Registered Dietitian, concepts of dietetic practice and jurisprudence for Registered Dietitians.
NUTR 301 Fundamentals of Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Fundamentals of nutrition, emphasizing energy, carbohydrates, lipids and proteins. The lab will use common techniques to illustrate principles of human nutrition. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization and Honors in Nutrition. Offered concurrently with NUTR 303. Credit will only be given for one of NUTR 301 or 303. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 and PHYSL 210. Pre or corequisite: BIOCH 310.
NUTR 302 Fundamentals of Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Fundamentals of nutrition with emphasis on vitamins and inorganic elements. The lab will use common techniques to illustrate principles of human nutrition. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization and Honors in Nutrition. Offered concurrently with NUTR 304. Credit will only be given for one of NUTR 302 or 304. Prerequisites: BIOCH 310 and NUTR 301.
NUTR 303 Fundamentals of Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of nutrition, emphasizing energy, carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Offered concurrently with NUTR 301. Credit will only be given for one of NUTR 301 or 303. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200 and PHYSL 210. Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOCH 310.
NUTR 304 Fundamentals of Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of nutrition with emphasis on vitamins and inorganic elements. Offered concurrently with NUTR 302. Credit will only be given for one of NUTR 302 or 304. Prerequisites: (BIOCH 310 and PHYSL 210). NUTR 303 or NU FS 305 recommended.
NUTR 380 Sports Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Basic theory related to nutritional requirements for all levels of athletic performance. Application of sports nutrition concepts for recreational to elite level athletes. Course content includes energy systems, hydration, pre- and post-event nutrition, weight management and body composition issues of athletes and ergogenic aids. Prerequisite: NU FS 305 or (NUTR 301 or 303).
NUTR 400 Research Methods in Nutritional Science Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-0). Familiarizes students with skills required for the formation of a research problem, and for the execution and presentation of empirical research. Lectures incorporate key concepts of experimental design, logistics of data collection and basic analysis and are complemented by work with a faculty advisor to develop a research proposal. Students will present their proposal in a seminar. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Nutrition major. Prerequisites: NUTR 301, 302, and *90.
NUTR 401 Undergraduate Nutritional Science Independent Project Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-1s-5). An independent research project on an approved topic, supervised by a faculty member. Normally this is a continuation of work begun in NUTR 400. It includes implementation of a research project, data analysis and presentation of results orally and in writing. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Nutrition major. Prerequisite: NUTR 400.
NUTR 440 Current Topics in Nutritional Science Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). A comprehensive review of current and emerging nutritional assessment tools used to evaluate food and nutrient intake, and the nutritional status of individuals, groups and communities in health and disease. Advanced topics in nutritional assessment and metabolism. Only open to fourth- year students in the Nutrition Major and Honors in Nutrition. Prerequisite: NUTR 400.
NUTR 443 Diabetes, Cardiovascular Disease and Lifestyle Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This is an advanced course examining the relationship between the role of lifestyle factors in the etiology and pathophysiology, as well as the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Application of recent findings to our understanding of these chronic metabolic diseases will be addressed. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 543). Credit will only be given for one of NUTR 443 and AFNS 543. Prerequisites: NUTR 301 or 303 and NUTR 302 or 304, or consent of Instructor.
NUTR 452 Nutrition in the Prevention of Chronic Human Diseases Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course to review current research and the scientific basis of nutrition intervention in the prevention and treatment of chronic human disease. Translation of research findings to nutrition recommendations in topical areas including global health and food supply, obesity, cardiovascular disease, polycystic ovary syndrome and behavior-cognitive disorders. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 552). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 552 and NUTR 452. Prerequisites: (NUTR 302 or 304 or NU FS 305) and NU FS 356 or consent of instructor. *6 PHYSL recommended.
NUTR 466 Introduction to Dietetic Practice Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and discussion to improve readiness of students to work independently in the development of professional practice skills in dietetics. Open only to students accepted into the Integrated Dietetic Internship. Required before placement in NUTR 469, 470, 471 or 472. Prerequisites: NU FS 223 and NUTR 468. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 468 Clinical Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Basic principles of nutrition in clinical situations. The role of diet in the management of various diseases. The laboratory sessions include practical experience in providing individualized nutritional care for clients from various cultural backgrounds. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Nutrition major. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 568). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 568, NUTR 468, and NU FS 468. Pre- or corequisite: NUTR 301. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 469 Introductory Professional Practice in Clinical Dietetics Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, 4 weeks). Practical experience in provision of nutrition care, focusing on basic skills of assessment, planning, implementation and evaluation. Continuing care agencies, rural health centres and acute care hospitals. Students may take this course simultaneously with INT D 411. Open only to students accepted into the Integrated Dietetic Internship. Prerequisites: NU FS 223, NUTR 466, and 468. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 470 Professional Practice in Community Nutrition Œ0 (fi 1) (variable, 12 weeks). Practical experience in assessing needs and planning, implementing and evaluating nutrition programs in a variety of community settings. Open only to students accepted into the Integrated Dietetic Internship. Prerequisite: NU FS 223, 377 and NUTR 466. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 471 Professional Practice in Foodservice Management Œ0 (fi 1) (variable, 12 weeks). Practical experience in assessment, planning implementation and evaluation of food service systems. Institutional, community and commercial settings. Open only to students accepted into the Integrated Dietetic Internship Program. Prerequisites: (NU FS 363 or 361) and NU FS 461 and (AREC 323 or AG EC 323 or alternate business course). Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 472 Professional Practice in Clinical Dietetics Œ0 (fi 1) (variable, 15 weeks). Practical experience in a variety of acute, continuing care and ambulatory care settings. The student is expected to demonstrate professional competencies in assessment, planning, development and monitoring of nutrition care plans for patients and clients. Open only to students accepted into the Integrated Dietetic Internship. Prerequisites: NUTR 466, 469 and 476. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar
NUTR 476 Advanced Clinical Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The principles of diet therapy in selected areas of current interest. Emphasis on case studies, research, and practical problems in clinical dietetics. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Nutrition major. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 578). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 578 and NUTR 476. Prerequisite: NUTR 302 and NUTR 468. May contain alternative delivery sections: refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NUTR 477 Advanced Community Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Builds on concepts learned in introductory community nutrition that relate to health promotion, food security, policy, program planning and community nutrition throughout the lifecycle. Students will develop the skills to write a community grant application. Field trips to places and events that relate to community nutrition. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 577). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 577 and NUTR 477. Prerequisites: (NUTR 302 or NU FS 305), NU FS 356 and NU FS 377.
NUTR 478 Advanced Nutrition: Energy, Carbohydrates, Lipids, and Proteins Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Scientific literature and current issues in the areas of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. A major integrative group project is also required. Students cannot obtain credit in both NU FS 478 and NUTR 478. Prerequisites: (NUTR 301 or 303) and (NUTR 302 or 304).
NUTR 479 Advanced Nutrition: Vitamins and Inorganic Elements Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course in vitamins and inorganic elements. Introduction to seminar presentation and critical evaluation of current literature. Students will learn how to write a scientific paper. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 579). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 579, NUTR 479 and NU FS 479. Prerequisites: NUTR 301 or 303 and NUTR 302 or 304.
NUTR 482 Introduction to Dietetic Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and discussion to improve readiness of students to work independently in the development of professional practice skills in dietetics. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Required before placement in NUTR 483, 484, 485, 486, 487 and 488. Prerequisites: NU FS 223 and NUTR 468.
NUTR 483 Introductory Professional Practice In Clinical Dietetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4 weeks). Practical experience in provision of nutrition care, focusing on basic skills of assessment, planning, implementation and evaluation. Continuing care agencies, rural health centres and acute care hospitals. Students may take this course simultaneously with INT D 411. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisites: NU FS 223, NUTR 466, and 468.
NUTR 484 Professional Practice In Community Nutrition I Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 6 weeks). Practical experience in assessing needs; program planning; implementation; and evaluation in a variety of community settings. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisites: NU FS 223, 377 and NUTR 482.
NUTR 485 Professional Practice In Community Nutrition II Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 6 weeks). This course builds on NUTR 470 to enable students to consolidate skills and competency in assessing needs; program planning; implementation; and evaluation in a variety of community settings. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisite: NUTR 484.
NUTR 486 Professional Practice In Foodservice and Management I Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 6 weeks). Practical experience in assessing; process planning and implementation; and evaluation of foodservice and management operations in a variety of settings. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisites: NU FS 363 or 361, NU FS 461, ACCTG 300, SMO 200 and 311.
NUTR 487 Professional Practice In Foodservice and Management II Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 6 weeks). This course builds on NUTR 472 to enable students to consolidate skills and competency in assessing; process planning and implementation; and evaluation of food service and management operations in a variety of settings. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisites: NUTR 486.
NUTR 488 Professional Practice In Clinical Dietetics Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, 15 weeks). Practical experience in a variety of acute, continuing care and ambulatory care settings. The student is expected to demonstrate professional competencies in assessment, planning, development and monitoring of nutrition care plans for patients and clients. Only open to students in the BSc Nutrition and Food Science, Dietetics Specialization Program. Prerequisites: NUTR 476, 482 and 483.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) 400-level courses in NUTR may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee. A 300-level courses may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the AFNS Graduate Program Committee. (See §174.1.1(1))
(2) See Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS) listing for related courses.
#
Nutrition and Food Sciences
NU FS
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS), Animal Science (AN SC), Interdisciplinary (INT D), Nutrition (NUTR) and Plant Science (PL SC) listings for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
NU FS 100 Introduction to Food Science and Technology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the nature of food, food technology, food safety. Not open to students in the Nutrition and Food Science degree program who have taken or are currently taking any 300 or higher NU FS courses.
NU FS 200 Introduction to Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles of functional food concepts, health claims, regulations, consumer trends, value added food production, and processing technology, and marketing strategies in the food industry. Prerequisite: NU FS 100 or NUTR 100 or consent of Instructor.
NU FS 201 Physical Principles of Food Structure and Functionality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Theory and application of the principles of physics important to understanding food structure and physical functionality. Topics include food materials science, flow, mechanical and physical properties of foods. Physics concepts examined include mechanics, temperature, heat and thermodynamics. Labs are problem solving sessions. Prerequisite: CHEM 102.
NU FS 223 The Cultural Ecology of Food and Health =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary dietary patterns, including how food choices are shaped by cultural, social, and economic spheres. The roles of culture and religion as determinants of healthy eating will be highlighted. Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 223 and 323. Prerequisite: NUTR 100 or NU FS 305.
NU FS 250 Applied Food Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). Fundamental food preparation skills and practical application of food theory to household food preparation issues through laboratory- based instruction. Prerequisite: NUTR 100 and NUFS 100. Only open to students in the Nutrition and Food Science General, Honors in Nutrition and Dietetic Specialization Programs.
NU FS 283 Introduction to Food Engineering =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Mass and energy balances, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer in food systems. Prerequisites: NU FS 201 or (*3 PHYS and MATH 113 or 114).
NU FS 300 Fundamentals of Dairy Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-2s-0). Physiology of lactation, Biosynthesis and properties of milk components. Physical, chemical, microbiological, technological and nutritional aspects of milk. Prerequisite: *3 in Biochemistry. Credit cannot be obtained for NU FS 300 and DAIRY 300.
NU FS 305 Introduction to the Principles of Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Basic principles of nutrition and metabolism of macronutrients and micronutrients. Students cannot obtain credit in NU FS 305 if they are currently taking or have obtained credit in NUTR 301, 302, 303, or 304. Prerequisites: NUTR 100 or NU FS 100, and *6 in the sciences (recommended that *3 be BIOCH).
NU FS 310 Teaching and Communication in Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Students will gain skills in teaching and communicating nutrition information effectively to different populations (children, elderly, cultural groups, healthcare professionals) using a variety of different approaches and modalities. The theory of learning, communication and behaviour change will provide a foundation for all activities and approaches to evaluation of communication tools will be emphasized. Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 310 or 410. Prerequisite: NUTR 100. Corequisite: NU FS 305 or NUTR 301.
NU FS 311 Introduction to Food Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to unit operations involved in food processing. Topics include moisture control and dehydration, high and low temperature operations, separation processes and other novel food processing techniques. Not open to students in Honors Food Science or the Food Science and Technology Specialization. Prerequisites: NU FS 201, and NU FS 372 or 373.
NU FS 312 Quality Assurance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1.5). Statistical methods in quality assurance, sampling plans, control charts, sensory evaluation and risk management in the food industry, HACCP, good manufacturing practices, food regulations, Iabelling requirements and ISO 9000 standards. Prerequisite: (NU FS 361 or 363) and introductory statistics.
NU FS 353 Unit Operations in Food Processing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Processes used in food manufacturing. Refrigeration, evaporation, sedimentation, centrifugation, filtration, and contact-equilibrium separation methods. Prerequisite: NU FS 283.
NU FS 356 Nutrition Across the Lifespan =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A lecture course that examines the understanding of how nutrients act on a cellular, tissue and whole organism level to influence human growth, development and aging. Students cannot obtain credit in both NU FS 356 and 456. Prerequisite: *3 of NUTR 301, 303 or NU FS 305.
NU FS 361 Food Microbiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Environmental factors affecting the growth, activity and destruction of microorganisms in food and their application to control foodborne illness and spoilage in the food processing and food service industries. Given concurrently with NU FS 363, not open to students with credit in NU FS 363. Limited registration. Preference will be given to students in the Food Science and Technology major. Prerequisite: MICRB 265.
NU FS 363 Food Microbiology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Environmental factors affecting the growth, activity, and destruction of microorganisms in food and their application to control foodborne illness and spoilage in the food processing and food service industries. Given concurrently with NU FS 361, not open to students with credit in NU FS 361. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or 108 or *3 in Microbiology.
NU FS 372 Food Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The fundamental chemistry of major and minor components of food and food additives. The relationship between chemistry and function in food systems is discussed. Laboratory emphasizes analytical techniques. Given concurrently with NU FS 373. Not open to students with credit in NU FS 373. Prerequisites: CHEM 102, (164 or 261) and 263.
NU FS 373 Food Chemistry =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). The fundamental chemistry of major and minor components of food and food additives. The relationship between chemistry and function in food systems is discussed. The project component emphasizes current topics in food chemistry. Given concurrently with NU FS 372. Not open to students with credit in NU FS 372. Prerequisite: CHEM (164 or 261) and 263. Pre or corequisite: CHEM 102.
NU FS 374 Food Fundamentals and Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Chemical, physical, and sensory properties of food products and factors affecting food quality in relation to preparation, processing, and storage of foods in the home and institution. Pre or corequisite: NU FS 372 or 373.
NU FS 377 Introduction to Nutrition in the Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of nutritional problems in contemporary communities. Community nutrition seeks to improve diets and nutritional status of whole populations by working at the community, provincial, national and international levels. Discussion of nutrition programs and resources. Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 377 and 477. Prerequisite: (NU FS 223 or 323) and (NU FS 305 or NUTR 301). May contain alternative delivery sections: refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NU FS 400 Undergraduate Reading Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual study. Critical reviews of selected literature under the direction of a staff member. Note: For third- and fourth-year students only. Students must obtain approval from Department before registration. May be taken more than once provided topic is different.
NU FS 401 Undergraduate Research Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Directed laboratory study under supervision of a staff member. Note: For third- and fourth-year students only. Students must obtain approval from Department before registration. May be taken more than once provided that topic is different.
NU FS 402 Brewing, Enology, and Food Fermentations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Biological, biochemical, and technical aspects of microbial and fungal fermentations used in the food and beverage industries, especially the lactic acid and alcohol fermentations. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 502). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 502 and NU FS 402. Prerequisite: MICRB 265 or NU FS 361 or 363.
NU FS 403 Processing of Milk and Dairy Products =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Technological principles of milk treatment and processes for fluid milk products; concentrated, dried, sterilized, and fermented dairy products; cheese, butter and ice cream. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 503). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 503 and NU FS 403. Prerequisite: NU FS 374 or consent of Instructor.
NU FS 404 Muscle Food Science and Technology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3/2). Biological, biochemical, chemical, and technological aspects of the processing of animal muscle food including seafood product technology. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 504). Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 404 and AFNS 504. Prerequisite: *3 in Biochemistry.
NU FS 406 Science and Technology of Cereal and Oilseed Processing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3/2). Biological, biochemical, chemical, and technological aspects of the processing of cereals and oilseeds. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 507). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 507 and NU FS 406. Prerequisite: *3 in introductory Biochemistry or Biological Science, or NU FS 374 or consent of Instructor.
NU FS 407 Honors Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-1s-3). An independent research project on a current topic in Food Science supervised by a faculty member. The results of the research project will be presented in a written report and as oral presentation. Only open to students in the BSc Honors in Food Science. Prerequisites: NU FS 361, 372 and *90.
NU FS 424 Nutrition and Metabolism Related to Cancer Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course to address nutritional issues specifically related to cancer prevention, diagnosis, treatment and recovery. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 524). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 524, NU FS 424, ONCOL 524 and 424. Prerequisites: (NUTR 301 and 302) or (NU FS 305 and NU FS 356) and (PHYSL 210 and BIOCH 200) or *6 BIOCH.
NU FS 425 Methods and Applications in Nutritional Product Development and Quality Assurance Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Development of the rationale and concept or prototype of a novel food with beneficial nutritional properties. Practical and theoretical aspects of nutritional product development and quality assurance and current issues in nutrition and health. Students will complete a group project in the area of nutrition and food science. Only open to students in the BSc in Nutrition and Food Science, Nutrition and Food Major. Prerequisites: NU FS 356 and 374. Pre- or corequisite: NU FS 352 or 458 and *90.
NU FS 427 Food Safety =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides students with an understanding of the principles of risk: benefit evaluations related to safety concerns about foods. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 527). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 527 and NU FS 427. Prerequisites: *3 Biochemistry and *60 or consent of instructor.
NU FS 428 Advances in Human Nutrition and the Intestinal Microbiome Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Overview of the role of microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract and the impact on human health, interaction with dietary components and potential dietary modulation of the microbiome in the prevention of chronic disease. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 528). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 528 and NU FS 428. Prerequisite: One of NUTR 301, 302 or NU FS 305. *3 MICRB and *6 PHYSL recommended.
NU FS 430 Principles of Sensory Evaluation of Foods Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Principles and methods of analysis of the sensory properties of foods; appearance, texture, aroma, and taste. Physiology of sensory receptors. Applications, advantages, and limitations of sensory methods. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 530). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 530 and NU FS 430. Prerequisites: Introductory statistics and NU FS 374.
NU FS 436 Advanced Topics in Nutrition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s-0). Exploration of the scientific literature in selected topics in Nutrition. Lectures in fundamentals of human nutrition related to each topic will be presented to compliment discussion and critical review of readings from primary research and review papers. Application of new findings to understanding of human nutrition will be addressed. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 536). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 536 or NU FS 436. Prerequisites: NU FS 305 and 356.
NU FS 442 Sustainability of Food and Bio-based Products Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-2s-0). This course provides a comprehensive review on sustainability in the food and “green” products industries, and provides a hands-on introduction to methods such as Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) which is used to evaluate the environmental impact of products and processes. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 542). Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 442 or AFNS 542. Prerequisite: NU FS 283 or 311, or consent of instructor.
NU FS 450 Food Product Development Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Design of concept, formulation, processing, packaging and labeling of a new food product and development of quality assurance and marketing strategies. Prototype development in the laboratory and testing of consumer acceptability. Open to fourth-year students in the Nutrition and Food Science, and Food Business Management Programs. Prerequisite: NU FS 374. Pre or corequisite: NU FS 353 or NU FS 403.
NU FS 454 Unit Operations in Food Preservation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Processes used in food preservation. Dehydration, freezing, sterilization and canning, irradiation and high pressure processing. Effect of processing on food properties. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 554). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 554 or NU FS 454. Prerequisite: NU FS 283. Pre or corequisite: NU FS 361 (or 363) and 372 (or 373).
NU FS 458 Current Topics and Controversies in Nutrition =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-2s-0). An advanced course that explores current nutritional recommendations and topical areas of nutrition. Cannot be taken for credit by students in the Nutrition major. Credit will only be given for one of NU FS 352 and NU FS 458. Prerequisite: NU FS 356.
NU FS 461 Foodservice Systems Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Operational techniques and special problems encountered during the preparation and service of food in quantity, in both commercial operations and foodservice establishments. The laboratory sessions will provide experience in quantity food production. Prerequisite: NU FS 223. Pre- or corequisite: NU FS 374. AREC 323 recommended. May contain alternate delivery sections: refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
NU FS 480 Foodborne Pathogens =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Established and emerging causative agents of microbial foodborne illness, their significance and control in the food chain. Rationale for regulatory intervention to enhance the microbiological safety of foods. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 580). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 580 and NU FS 480. Prerequisite: MICRB 265 or NU FS 361 or 363.
NU FS 481 Advanced Foods =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Critical evaluation of current literature on the effects of ingredients and processing on quality characteristics of foods. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 581). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 581 and NU FS 481. Prerequisites: NU FS 374 and *3 Biochemistry or consent of instructor.
NU FS 490 Innovations in Food Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Integrated exploration of emerging concepts and novel technologies in food science with focus on high pressure treatment, food packaging, hygienic design and the use of enzymes in food. Pre- or corequisites: NU FS 283, (NU FS 372 or 373) and (NU FS 361 or 363).
NU FS 499 Advanced Agri-Chemical Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Advanced analysis of food and agri-industrial materials with a focus on good laboratory practices (GLP), chromatographic techniques (HPLC, GC), mass spectrometry, and other modern techniques from sample preparation to analysis of data. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 599). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 599 and NU FS 499. Prerequisite: NU FS 372 or consent of Instructor.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) 400-level courses in NU FS may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee. 300-level courses may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the AFNS Graduate Program Committee.
(2) See Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS) listing for related courses.
#
Obstetrics and Gynaecology
OB GY
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
OB GY 546 Obstetrics and Gynaecology Student Internship Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 6 weeks). Student internship in obstetrics and gynaecology for students registered in the MD program.
#
Occupational Therapy
OCCTH
Department of Occupational Therapy Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Note: All OCCTH courses are open to Occupational Therapy students only except OCCTH 206 which are open to all students.
Undergraduate Courses
OCCTH 328 Fieldwork Œ4.5 (fi 9) (either term, 8 weeks). Credit. Practical experience in approved facilities and community agencies. Prerequisites: consent of Department; OCCTH 324 and completion of all Year 3 academic courses; attendance at Professional Development Seminar.
Graduate Courses
Note: Open only to graduate students in Occupational Therapy program unless departmental consent is granted.
OCCTH 501 Theory and Practice of Enabling Occupation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Conceptual models and theoretical approaches applied to occupational therapy practice.
OCCTH 502 Application, Assessment and Evaluation of Occupational Performance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Occupational therapy theoretical foundations, clinical reasoning, and practical approaches for the identification of occupational performance deficits. In addition students will learn basic practical client interaction skills.
OCCTH 503 Professionalism and Supervision in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Underpinned by theoretical perspectives, a framework is provided for students to (a) develop and demonstrate professionalism, (b) learn behaviours and skills in professional practice, including therapeutic use of self and inter-professional competencies, and (c) work effectively with colleagues and with those they supervise. Students participate in one week of fieldwork observation.
OCCTH 507 Occupation and Society: Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and philosophies underpinning occupational therapy and occupational science.
OCCTH 510 Theory, Evidence and Skills in Practice: Application Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). Application of occupational therapy principles and skills, supported by evidence based practice, in physical and mental health, functioning, participation and activities. Corequisites: All Year 1 Fall Term Courses.
OCCTH 517 Foundations of Psychiatry and Mental Health Practice for Occupational Therapists Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Foundational knowledge of the description, mechanism and classification of psychiatric phenomenon required for the provision of client centred, evidence-informed occupational therapy with persons experiencing chronic and acute mental illness.
OCCTH 518 Assessment and Interventions for Occupational Therapists in Mental Health Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Occupational therapy theories, assessments, and intervention techniques aimed at mental health promotion, illness/injury prevention and facilitation of recovery and occupational performance across the lifespan and settings.
OCCTH 519 Enabling Occupation: Advanced Practices in Mental Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-1). A discussion and analysis of selected topics of current interest in psychiatry as related to occupational therapy practice. Selected complex cases and special populations are addressed.
OCCTH 520 Theory, Evidence and Skills in Practice: Integration Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). Case based clinical reasoning to integrate occupational therapy theory and values in the selection of intervention media and modalities for physical and mental health, functioning, participation, and activities. Prerequisites: Completion of all Year 1 Fall Term courses. Corequisites: All Year 1 Winter Term courses.
OCCTH 522 Enable Occupation Through the Use of Assistive Technology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and practice skills to ensure the correct interface between clients’ needs, assistive technology, occupation, and context.
OCCTH 525 Fieldwork-Learning in a Practice Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 7 weeks). Practical experience and application of Year 1 courses in approved facilities and community agencies. Students will be expected to complete specific projects designed to integrate the core knowledge of occupational therapy theory. Prerequisites: Consent of Department; attendance at mandatory fieldwork session(s); completion of all Year 1 academic courses.
OCCTH 526 Fieldwork - Learning in a Practice Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 7 weeks). Practical experience in approved facilities and community agencies. Prerequisites: Consent of Department; attendance at mandatory fieldwork session(s); completion of all Year 1 and Year 2 Fall Term academic courses; OCCTH 525.
OCCTH 527 Fieldwork-Learning in a Practice Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 7 weeks). Practical experience in approved facilities and community agencies. Prerequisites: Consent of Department; attendance at mandatory fieldwork session(s); completion of all Year 2 academic courses; OCCTH 526.
OCCTH 528 Fieldwork - Learning in a Practice Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 7 weeks). Practical experience in approved facilities and community agencies. Prerequisites: Consent of Department; attendance at mandatory fieldwork session(s); completion of all Year 2 academic courses; OCCTH 527.
OCCTH 530 Theory, Evidence and Skills in Practice: Synthesis Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). The use and design of interventions for physical and mental health, functioning, participation, and activities supported by the analysis and synthesis of occupational therapy principles. Corequisites: All Year 2 Fall Term courses.
OCCTH 540 Theory, Evidence and Skills in Practice Evaluation Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). Application and evaluation of occupational therapy intervention media and modalities for physical and mental health functioning, participation, and activities. Prerequisites: Completion of all Year 1 academic and fieldwork courses and Year 2, Fall Term academic and fieldwork courses. Corequisites: All Year 2 Winter term courses.
OCCTH 543 Student Selected Modules Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 13 hours). Students must successfully complete either a minimum of three modules in different topics or one *3 Individual Study (OCCTH 599 or equivalent). Note: Course title is variable; course may be repeated.
OCCTH 553 Influences on Occupational Performance: Human Systems III -Adaptability of the Nervous System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of nervous system adaptation and plasticity over the lifespan, with an emphasis on nervous system response to injury and disease, and the biological basis for occupational performance. Prerequisites: Completion of all Year 1 academic and fieldwork courses. Corequisites: OCCTH 530, 557.
OCCTH 554 Enabling Occupation through Neurological Rehabilitation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Occupational therapy for neurological conditions encountered in practice. Prerequisites: Completion of all Year 1 academic and fieldwork courses and Year 2, Fall Term academic and fieldwork courses. Corequisites: OCCTH 540, 558.
OCCTH 555 Enabling Occupation and Participation for Children and Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Application of occupational therapy principles with an emphasis on children, youth and families, supported by evidence-based practice, and the incorporation of current theories, complex integrated case studies, and experiential learning.
OCCTH 556 Enabling Occupation and Participation for Older Adults Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Application of occupational therapy principles with an emphasis on older adults and families, supported by evidence-based practice, and the incorporation of both current theories and complex integrated case studies.
OCCTH 558 Enabling Occupation: Community Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Application and integration of occupational therapy principles and practice in community settings. The focus is on complex care and chronic degenerative conditions.
OCCTH 559 Enabling Occupation: Productivity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The relationship between the client’s occupational performance strengths and resources in meeting the demands and expectations of productivity roles in workplace, home and community.
OCCTH 562 Evidence-Based Practice in Occupational Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Critical evaluation of occupational therapy and related literature including methodology and design.
OCCTH 563 Research Design and Knowledge Translation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of: (a) research methodology and design as they (i) apply to the development of a project proposal and (ii) as they affect published findings in the literature; and (b) consideration of how knowledge is translated into occupational therapy practice.
OCCTH 564 Evaluation of Occupational Therapy Services Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The integration of social research procedures with occupational therapy models for evaluating the processes, structures and outcomes of programs and services to which occupational therapists contribute.
OCCTH 565 Scholarly Practice Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This course will further the students’ knowledge of the resources and skills required for successful completion of OCCTH 900 Directed Final Project.
OCCTH 566 Evidence-Based Practice and Knowledge Translation in Occupational Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Critical thinking, accessing, evaluating and synthesizing the evidence for occupational therapy and a review of evidence generation methodologies and research design. Understanding and application of principles of knowledge translation as it relates to the healthcare and the profession of occupational therapy.
OCCTH 567 Research Design and Scholarly Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Research methodology and design as they apply to the development of a directed Final Project.
OCCTH 583 Influences on Occupational Performance: Human Systems I: Structure, Function and Conditions Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-0-1). The study of: (a) physical human systems, nervous system and occupational performance deficits resulting from illness, injury, and disease; and (b) the concurrent development of related assessment skills and occupational therapy interventions.
OCCTH 584 Influences on Occupational Performance: Human Systems II: Conditions and Interventions Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-0-1). Occupational performance deficits resulting from illness, injury, and disease and the application of related assessment skills and occupational therapy interventions.
OCCTH 585 Influences on Occupational Performance: Human Systems III: Theory and Practice in Neurology Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 6-0-0). Application of occupational therapy principles, supported by current principles of neuroscience, for neurological conditions encountered in practice.
OCCTH 599 Individual Study Œ1-4 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). Designed to allow a student to pursue a topic of interest in more depth than permitted by existing courses. Prerequisite: Departmental approval of plan of study. May be repeated.
OCCTH 699 Individual Study Œ1-4 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, variable). Designed to allow a student to pursue an advanced topic of interest in more depth than permitted by existing courses. Prerequisite: Departmental approval of plan of study. May be repeated.
OCCTH 900 Directed Final Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). The synthesis of academic knowledge, with fieldwork experiences and directed to the exploration of a specific topic, relevant to occupational therapy. Students will demonstrate inquiry, reflection and critical thinking. Students will demonstrate inquiry, reflection and critical thinking through required participation in seminars, a written report and a conference style presentation.
OCCTH 903 Directed Final Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). The synthesis of academic knowledge, with fieldwork experiences and directed to the exploration of a specific topic, relevant to occupational therapy. Students will demonstrate inquiry, reflection and critical thinking through required participation in seminars, a written report and a conference style presentation.
#
Oncology
ONCOL
Department of Oncology
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
ONCOL 233 Concepts and Applications in Medical Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Introduction into fundamental medical physics concepts including theory of atomic and nuclear structure, radioactivity, and electromagnetic and particulate radiation. Topics to be covered include production of medically useful radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, radiation dose, and an introduction to physics concepts used in a radiation oncology environment. Prerequisites: PHYS 124, 126, and MATH 113 or 114, or permission of the department.
ONCOL 234 Therapeutic and Imaging Equipment in Radiation Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). Builds on the concepts covered in ONCOL 233, with a shifting emphasis towards production of radiation, its shaping and measurements in the clinical environment as well as introduction to the fundamental concepts in equipment used in radiation therapy. Specific topics include: general principles of X-ray tube, Linac, Cobalt machine, dosimetry instrumentation, principles of diagnostic imaging techniques (including X-ray imaging, CT, MRI, PET and SPECT), innovative radiation treatment methods, treatment simulators; imaging equipment used for radiation therapy verification and general QA procedures for all imaging techniques as well as brachytherapy equipment. Prerequisite: ONCOL 233.
ONCOL 243 Radiation Protection and Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). Introduction of the fundamental concepts in radiation protection and safety for the patient, self, and general public. Topics include: general principles and practices of working with radiation in a healthcare environment, differences in protection required for different types of radiation, basic radiation shielding considerations and facility design, monitoring and measurement of radiation for protection purposes, and relevant regulatory agencies and associated standards. Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
ONCOL 253 Cancer Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the biology of cancer highlighting features that distinguish normal cells from cancer cells. Specific topics include the genetic basis of cancer, control of cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis, mechanism of action of cancer drugs and the development of resistance. Prerequisite: CELL 201.
ONCOL 254 Principles of Oncology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A survey course outlining the basic concepts in clinical oncology including epidemiology, cancer screening, cancer staging and pathology, molecular diagnostics, all modalities of treating primary, metastatic and resistant cancers. Definitions for the application of medical terminology will also be addressed. Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.
ONCOL 255 Introduction to Oncology Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 30 hours/week - 4 weeks). Principles and concepts of clinical oncology. Prerequisite: ONCOL 254.
ONCOL 306 Imaging Principles/Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-2). A unique course exploring the use of imaging in radiation therapy from a radiologic, radiation oncologic, and radiotherapeutic perspective. Students will gain skills in operating imaging software, identifying normal relational and cross sectional anatomy and pathological conditions using a variety of imaging modalities, and radiographic images, contouring tumor volumes, and will be expected to analyze and critique treatment images to make informed treatment decisions. Prerequisite: ANAT 305 or permission of the department.
ONCOL 309 Clinical Oncology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). The field of radiation oncology is introduced, as well as the evaluation and treatment of tumours with ionizing radiation. Students will begin the study of the various modalities of radiation treatment, and the respective treatment regimens and techniques utilized for the most common tumour sites. Prerequisite: Permission of the Department and ONCOL 255.
ONCOL 310 Clinical Oncology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). The study of the field of radiation oncology is further developed. By the completion of the course, students will have developed an understanding of the various treatment options for each of the tumour sites, and the respective treatment regimes, techniques, schedules, results, and toxicities of treatment with ionizing radiation. Prerequisite: ONCOL 309.
ONCOL 320 Introduction to Oncology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides an introduction to oncology with an emphasis on the molecular and cellular biology of cancer. Specific topics include the genetic basis of cancer, the control of cell proliferation, metastasis, tumour immunology, angiogenesis, and cancer therapies. Prerequisite: BIOL 201 or CELL 201 with a minimum grade of C, or consent of the Department.
ONCOL 335 Radiobiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the physics, chemistry and biology of radiation effects on cells and tissues. Concepts discussed include the biological factors that influence the response of normal and neoplastic cells to radiation therapy; cell survival curves; linear energy transfer and relative biological effectiveness; effects on tissues of time, dose and fractionation of radiation treatment; and emerging concepts in radiobiology. Prerequisites: ONCOL 253 and 254.
ONCOL 355 Treatment Planning and Dosimetry I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). The foundation of radiation therapy treatment planning with the principles of radiation dose deposition within the patient, characteristics of radiation beams, and the intricacies of treatment calculations applied in order to develop an appropriate treatment strategy for typical tumor locations. The course covers both low and high energy X-ray, electron and Cobalt60 dose calculations for a variety of treatment techniques. Prerequisite: ONCOL 233, 234.
ONCOL 356 Treatment Planning and Dosimetry II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-2). Concepts from ONCOL 355 are explored in more detail. Advanced topics in treatment planning will be covered, including 4 dimensional treatment planning, Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy, Inverse planning, Arc therapy, and Brachytherapy planning. Prerequisite: ONCOL 355.
ONCOL 424 Nutrition and Metabolism Related to Cancer Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course to address nutritional issues specifically related to cancer prevention, diagnosis, treatment and recovery. Graduate students may not register for credit (see ONCOL 524). Credit will only be given for one of ONCOL 524, 424 and AFNS 524, 424. Prerequisite: (NUTR 301 and 302) or (NU FS 352 and 6* Biochemistry) or ONCOL 320.
ONCOL 425 Advanced Topics in Cancer Research Œ3-6 (variable) (either term, 3-0-0). This course spans both the fall and winter terms. At least four different modules will be offered in each term. Students can elect to take the course for 3 units credit (total of four modules over the course of the year) or 6 unit credits (total of eight modules over the course of the year). Each module is comprised of 6 sessions of 80 min each and will be taught independently by individual instructors. Modules will have both lecture and group discussion components. Additional modules will be added based on interest and demand. Prerequisite: CELL 201/BIOL 201 and a 300 level science course in BIOCH, GENET, ONCOL, CELL or consent of the Department.
ONCOL 475 Fundamentals of Radiopharmaceutical Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-0-3). Practical techniques in the use of radioisotopes in the life sciences. This course focuses on safe handling of radio-isotopes, measurement of radioactivity, performance of radiochemical reactions and the application of radionuclides in life sciences (99mTc-labeling and 18F-labeling). The accompanying seminar provides the necessary background knowledge to engage with the practical challenges of radionuclide handling. Credit cannot be obtained for both ONCOL 475 and 575. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department.
Graduate Courses
Note: See also PMCOL 505, MED 573, PHYS 475 and PHYS 477.
ONCOL 520 Tumor Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The course will provide an introduction to the basic science of oncology. Topics to be covered comprise: the genetic basis of cancer, including the role of proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes; mechanisms of carcinogenesis and radiation-sensitivity, including DNA repair and cell cycle control; the molecular basis of tumor metastasis, including tumor cell invasion, extravasation and dormancy; the role of inflammation in cancer initiation and progression; angiogenesis; cancer genetics, and epigenetics; cell signaling; experimental therapeutics; cancer stem cells; drug-resistance; metabolism and palliation. Course offered in alternate (even-numbered) years. Prerequisites: BIOCH 200, and one of the following: BIOCH 320 or 330 or ONCOL 320.
ONCOL 524 Nutrition and Metabolism Related to Cancer Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture and reading course to address nutritional issues specifically related to cancer prevention, diagnosis, treatment and recovery. Lectures are the same as for ONCOL 424, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of ONCOL 524, 424 and AFNS 524, 424. Prerequisite: (NUTR 301 and 302) or (NUFS 352 and 6* Biochemistry) or ONCOL 320.
ONCOL 550 Medical Radiation Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of radiation physics, production and properties of ionizing radiation and their interactions with matter and tissue. Interactions of photons and of charged particles with matter. Concepts of radiation dosimetry (theoretical and experimental, cavity theory and ionization chambers). Consent of Department required.
ONCOL 552 Fundamentals of Applied Dosimetry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Theory and practical techniques of external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy. Topics include single and multiple external beams, scatter analysis, inhomogeneity corrections, intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), dose calculation algorithms, fundamentals of brachytherapy, and brachytherapy dosimetry systems. Prerequisite: ONCOL 550.
ONCOL 554 Laboratory in Medical Radiation Physics Œ2 (fi 4) (Spring/Summer, 0-0-4). Practical aspects of medical physics as applied to radiation therapy. Exposure to the operation of various therapy machines and dose measuring equipment. Application of techniques to measure physical parameters of radiation beams. Introduction to radiation treatment planning with techniques for specific tumor sites. Prerequisite: ONCOL 550. Corequisite: ONCOL 552.
ONCOL 556 Laboratory in Imaging Œ2 (fi 4) (Spring/Summer, 0-0-4). Provides clinical and practical experience with diagnostic imaging equipment, to adequately provide consultative support required of a clinical medical physicist in imaging. Perform calibration and quality assurance procedures on medical imaging modalities. Prerequisites: ONCOL 550 and 562. Corequisites: ONCOL 568 and 564.
ONCOL 558 Health Physics Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 2-0-0). Sources of radiation, basic dosimetry, and hazards of ionizing radiation. Basics of radiation safety. Techniques for the detection, use, and safe handling of radiation sources. Radiation safety codes, laws and regulations. Consent of Department required.
ONCOL 560 Technology in Radiation Oncology Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 2-0-0). Explore the use of technology and physics principles in the diagnosis, tumour and normal tissue delineation, treatment planning, treatment delivery, and treatment verification as applied to cancer patients. Consent of Department required.
ONCOL 562 Theory of Medical Imaging Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A system theory approach to the production, analysis, processing and reconstruction of medical images. An extensive use of Fourier techniques is used to describe the processes involved with conventional radiographic detectors, digital and computed radiography. Review and application of image processing techniques used in diagnostic and therapeutic medicine. Consent of Department required.
ONCOL 564 Physics of Nuclear Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Discussion of the fundamental physics of radioactivity, the use of unsealed sources in medical diagnosis and treatment. Unsealed source dosimetry, nuclear measurement instrumentation, spectrometry. Design and function of gamma cameras, single photon emission tomography, and positron emission tomography. Prerequisites: ONCOL 550 and 562.
ONCOL 566 Radiation Biophysics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Current theories and models of cellular responses to ionizing radiation. Modification of radiation response. Radiobiology of normal and neoplastic tissue systems. Late effects of radiation on normal tissue. Radiobiological modeling of normal tissue complication, probability and tumor control probability.
ONCOL 568 Physics of Diagnostic Radiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Rigorous development of the physics of x-ray production, interaction and detection in diagnostic radiology, including mammography and ultrasound. In-depth analysis of analog and digital systems in radiography and fluoroscopy is given. The description and design of computed tomographic systems as well as the associated reconstruction algorithms from single to multislice helical systems are studied. Prerequisites: ONCOL 550, 562.
ONCOL 570 Directed Reading in Experimental Oncology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Reading and discussion of current research literature on selected topics in experimental oncology under the direction of one or more faculty members. Topics presently available include cell adhesion mechanisms, cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, radiotherapy and susceptibility and resistance, oncogenes/tumor suppressor genes, and tumor cell metastasis. Notes: (1) Grades will be based on participation in group discussions and/or written reports from assigned readings with emphasis on critical evaluation of the subject matter. (2) Students in other graduate programs may register with the consent of Instructors. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
ONCOL 575 Fundamentals of Radiopharmaceutical Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-0-3). Practical techniques in the use of radioisotopes in the life sciences. This course focuses on safe handling of radio-isotopes, measurement of radioactivity, performance of radiochemical reactions and the application of radionuclides in life sciences (99mTc-labeling and 18F-labeling). The accompanying seminar provides the necessary background knowledge to engage with the practical challenges of radionuclide handling. Credit cannot be obtained for both ONCOL 475 and 575. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department.
ONCOL 580 Molecular Imaging: Tracers, Targets, Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an overview of molecular imaging probes and their application in basic and clinical science. The course will have an emphasis on radionuclide based probes and on their application in oncology but will also introduce other classes of probes (optical, MR, x-ray contrast, ultrasound and photoacoustic) and other pathologies. The course will examine imaging techniques, cell and tissue targets for imaging probes, the chemical elaboration of molecular imaging probes and some applications in the diagnosis and treatment of human disease. Molecular imaging in drug development will also be addressed. Prerequisite: Consent of the Department.
ONCOL 600 Graduate Medical Physics Seminar Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). Weekly seminars given by faculty on topics of interest to the medical physics community that are not formally included with the other didactic courses. Includes medical statistics, anatomy/physiology for medical physics, site-specific cancer, experience in clinic, Monte Carlo simulation, Matlab, MR spectroscopy, finite element analysis, and image fusion. No prerequisite.
ONCOL 620 Recent Advances in Cancer Research Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). A directed reading and seminar course based on recent developments in the cellular and molecular biology of cancer. The students will critically review papers selected from the recent literature and give oral presentations. Prerequisites: ONCOL 520 and consent of Department. Offered in alternate years.
ONCOL 660 Current Topics in Cancer Research Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 0-1.5s-0). A general seminar/discussion course on recent advances in a wide range of topics related to cancer development and management. Selected topics include experimental therapeutics, molecular oncogenetics, tumour immunobiology, DNA repair, and cell cycle regulation. Notes: (1) all graduate students in the Department of Oncology are expected to attend the seminars whether or not they are registered in the course. (2) All graduate students in the Department of Oncology should register in the course in their second year and present a seminar based on their research project. (3) All graduate students registered in ONCOL 660 will write a paper on a selected topic. Restricted to graduate students in the Department of Oncology.
ONCOL 661 Current Topics in Cancer Research II Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 0-1s-0). A general seminar course based on recent advances in a wide range of topics related to cancer. Note: Oncology 661 should be taken in the first term of the year in which Oncology 660 is taken. Graduate students must obtain one credit from ONCOL 661 in order to meet the minimum requirements for the MSc and PhD programs in the Department of Oncology. Restricted to graduate students in the Department of Oncology.
ONCOL 690 Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Methods and Applications Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Advanced course on modern magnetic resonance techniques including in-depth description of hardware; advanced imaging sequences and image reconstruction methods; methodologies for in-vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Prerequisite: BME 564 and consent of Instructor.
ONCOL 691 Advanced Magnetic Resonance Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Guided lecture course with preparation and delivery of teaching lectures on a current topic of Magnetic Resonance research in conjunction with ONCOL 692 and 693 presentations. Prerequisite: ONCOL 690 and consent of Instructor.
ONCOL 692 Advanced Radiological and Nuclear Imaging Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Guided reading course in advanced ultrasound, fluoroscopy, X-ray CT, or nuclear imaging with preparation and presentation of teaching lectures in conjunction with ONCOL 691 and 693 presentations. Prerequisite: ONCOL 562, 564, 568, 600, and consent of Instructor.
ONCOL 693 Advanced Radiotherapeutic Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Guided reading course with preparation and delivery of teaching lectures in novel radiotherapeutic techniques, advanced radiation techniques and delivery in conjunction with ONCOL 691 and 692 presentations. Prerequisite: ONCOL 550, 552, 600, and consent of Instructor.
#
Operations Management
OM
Department of Accounting, Operations and Information Systems Faculty of Business
Undergraduate Courses
OM 352 Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). A problem-solving course which introduces the student to deterministic and stochastic models which are useful for production planning and operations management in business and government. Note: Students are expected to have basic familiarity with microcomputer applications. Prerequisite: MATH 113 and STAT 151 or SCI 151. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 352.
OM 410 Supply Chain Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course focuses on the strategic role of the supply chain, key drivers of supply chain performance, and analytical methods for supply chain analysis. Possible topics include inventory planning and management, sourcing, transporting, and pricing products, supply chain network design, and coordination and value of information in a supply chain. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312 and OM 352.
OM 411 Business Process Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Business use processes to produce and deliver goods and services to customers. This course is about the conceptual and quantitative analysis of those business processes. The emphasis is on strategic and tactical decision making about operations so as to create competitive advantage for the organization. Possible topics include process mapping, process flow analysis, inventory, and quality. The topics will be illustrated through discussion and analysis of several case studies. The topics and techniques selected for this course are applicable to a wide variety of industries. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312.
OM 420 Introduction to Business Analytics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to Business Analytics - the combined use of data analysis techniques and optimization models to make data-driven business decisions. Business Analytics has applications in finance, marketing, and operations, such as insurance risk management, credit risk evaluation, targeted advertising, appointment scheduling, hotel and airline overbooking, and fraud detection. Students will learn how to build basic predictive models using data mining software and how to integrate the predictions into spreadsheet simulation models. The emphasis is on the practical use of analytical tools to maximize profit rather than on algorithm details. Prerequisite: MGTSC 352 or OM 352
OM 422 Simulation and Computer Modelling Techniques in Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Computer modelling of management systems in such functional areas as accounting, finance, marketing and operations. Basic concepts of deterministic and probabilistic (Monte Carlo) simulation and their applications. Microcomputer implementation of case studies using spreadsheets particularly emphasized. Required term project. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312 (or equivalent STAT course), MGTSC 352 or OM 352; and FIN 301 or ACCTG 311. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 422.
OM 461 Distribution Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will deal with the economically efficient distribution of goods and services from their points of creation to the customers. Topics will include strategic decisions, such as aggregate distribution plans and warehouse location, as well as operational decisions, such as selection of delivery routes and dispatching. This course has a significant microcomputer component. The potential of geographic-information-systems as a profit tool will be demonstrated. Prerequisite: MGTSC 312, MGTSC 352 or OM 352. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 461.
OM 468 Quantitative Management Consulting Project Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course applies the techniques developed in MGTSC 467 to a group project. The emphasis in the projects is on quantitative approaches to operational problems. Student groups will be assigned to consulting projects from businesses and other organizations in and near Edmonton. Groups will work on their projects under the supervision of the instructor(s). Prerequisites: MGTSC 467 or consent of Instructor. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 468.
OM 471 Decision Support Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Decision support systems integrated with various management tools in a microcomputer environment. Programming language to be used is Visual Basic for Applications. Different multicriteria decision making tools such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process, Multiattribute Utility Theory, Goal Programming and Multiobjective Optimization are introduced. Students create decision support systems with graphical user interfaces that use a formal multicriteria decision-making front end as well as optimization, simulation or other appropriate engines for calculations in the background. Student projects in this implementation-oriented course will come from different areas such as employee scheduling, facility location, project/product selection and portfolio optimization. Prerequisites: MGTSC 312, MGTSC 352 or OM 352. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 471.
OM 480 Honors Essay in Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation of the honors essay required for students in the Operations Management Honors program. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
OM 488 Selected Topics in Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites will depend on topic but may include: MGTSC 312, OM 352 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
OM 490 Operations Management Competition Part I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Preparation for Student Competition in Operations Management. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
OM 491 Operations Management Competition Part II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0). Completion of Student Competition in Operations Management. Prerequisite: OM 490 and consent of instructor.
OM 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of the Instructor and Associate Dean, Undergraduate Program.
OM 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: OM 495, consent of the Instructor and Associate Dean, Undergraduate Program.
OM 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: OM 496, consent of the Instructor and Associate Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
OM 502 Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on (1) the competitive advantage that a business unit can derive from innovative and efficient production and delivery of its goods and services and on (2) analytical approaches that are useful in understanding and improving an organization’s operations. Specific modules include process diagramming and analysis; measuring and managing flow times; inventory control and optimization; supply chain coordination and operations strategy. Cases will be used to illustrate operational efficiency and its significance to the profitability of a firm. Prerequisite: MGTSC 501. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 502.
OM 604 Bargaining and Negotiation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is a blend of both experiential learning and theory with the objective of making the student more effective in all types of bargaining. A study of positive theories on how to improve negotiation skills will be combined with analytical models of the game theoretic structure of bargaining. Through this mix of theories and several case studies and bargaining exercises, students will see both the opportunities for joint gain (win-win) and the constraints which can lead to inferior outcomes. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students. Prerequisites: First year MBA core courses. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 604.
OM 620 Introduction to Business Analytics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to Business Analytics - the combined use of data analysis techniques and optimization models to make data-driven business decisions. Business Analytics has applications in finance, marketing, and operations, such as insurance risk management, credit risk evaluation, targeted advertising, appointment scheduling, hotel and airline overbooking, and fraud detection. Students will learn how to build basic predictive models using data mining software and how to integrate the predictions into spreadsheet simulation models. The emphasis is on the practical use of analytical tools to maximize organizational objectives rather than on algorithm details. Prerequisite: MGTSC 501.
OM 622 Simulation and Computer Modelling Techniques in Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will discuss computer modelling of management systems in such functional areas as accounting, finance, marketing, and production. Basic concepts of deterministic and probabilistic (Monte Carlo) simulation and their applications will also be covered. Micro computer implementations of case studies using spreadsheets will be particularly emphasized. A term project will be required. Prerequisite: MGTSC 502 or OM 502. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 632.
OM 624 Project Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines project management including investigation and analysis, scope definition, resource analysis and estimation, timing estimation, cost estimation, scheduling, monitoring, and implementation.
OM 671 Decision Support Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Decision support systems integrated with various management tools in a microcomputer environment. Programming language to be used is Visual Basic for Applications. Different multicriteria decision making tools such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process, Multiattribute Utility Theory, Goal Programming and Multiobjective Optimization are introduced. Students create decision support systems with graphical user interfaces that use a formal multicriteria decision-making front end as well as optimization, simulation or other appropriate engines for calculations in the background. Student projects in this implementation-oriented course will come from different areas such as employee scheduling, facility location, project/product selection and portfolio optimization. Prerequisite: MGTSC 501 or 521. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 671.
OM 686 Selected Topics in Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
OM 701 Introduction to Operations Management Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a general introduction to the major research fields of operations management (OM). The focus will be on reading and evaluating current papers from prominent OM journals. The theory of science and the review process will be briefly discussed. Students are expected to have as mathematical background the equivalent of an upper-level undergraduate or first-year graduate courses in optimization and probability or stochastic modeling. This course may be appropriate for some graduate students in engineering or computing science. Prerequisite: A graduate or undergraduate course in operations management. Open to all doctoral students or with the written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
OM 702 Advanced Research Topics in Operations Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an in-depth introduction to a particular methodology or a particular setting that is relevant to research in operations management. The topic may vary from year to year. Possible topics include optimization modeling and formulation, stochastic modeling and optimization, behavioural research in operations management, and health care operations management. The required background for students will vary depending on the topic. This course may be appropriate for some graduate students in engineering or computing science. Prerequisite: Written permission of the instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
OM 710 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
OM 804 Bargaining and Negotiation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is a blend of both experiential learning and theory with the objective of making the student more effective in all types of bargaining. A study of positive theories on how to improve negotiation skills will be combined with analytical models of the game theoretic structure of bargaining. Through this mix of theories and several case studies and bargaining exercises, students will see both the opportunities for joint gain (win-win) and the constraints which can lead to inferior outcomes. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
OM 830 Operations Management Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding the strategic role of operations in an enterprise and the relationship between operations and other business functions; designing, implementing and controlling an effective and efficient operating process. Restricted to Executive MBA students only. Not to be taken by students with credit in MGTSC 830.
#
Ophthalmology
OPHTH
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Graduate Courses
OPHTH 600 Seminar in Ophthalmology Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Open to graduate students, particularly those in the Medical Sciences (Ophthalmology) program. Seminars are given by Residents in the Postgraduate Medical Education program in Ophthalmology. Tutorials are presented by staff or by visiting speakers. Topics covered include; pediatric ophthalmology/ strabismus, contact lens/cornea/external eye disease, neuro-ophthalmology, orbit/ oculoplastics, retina, principles of ocular surgery, glaucoma, ocular genetics. Specific topics will not be repeated more often than once each four years so that four consecutive enrolments are possible. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
OPHTH 601 Ocular Genetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides a comprehensive overview of various aspects of eye genetics including both basic science studies and clinical conditions. Clinical case studies and their investigation will form part of the course. Offered in alternate years. Format includes didactic lectures supplemented by brief student presentations and guest speakers. Grades are assigned according to participation and a final exam. Prerequisite: Familiarity with medical genetics and ophthalmology and the consent of the Department.
#
Oral Biology
OBIOL
Department of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
OBIOL 202 Oral Biology I Œ4 (fi 8) (two term, 62 hours). Basic microscopic anatomy pertinent to the main body systems and a more detailed treatment of the structure and development of oral tissues, with special reference to the teeth and their supporting structures. Clinical examples and a demonstration lab will be used to enhance the teaching of basic anatomy.
OBIOL 302 Oral Biology II Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 39 hours). A multidisciplinary course that examines the unique physiology, biochemistry and nutrition of oral structures. Topics will include functions of the periodontal tissues, the termporomandibular joint, mastication, deglutition, speech, special reflexes involving cranial nerves, receptors of the stomatognathic system, and salivary glands and relevance of saliva to caries. Oral manifestations of metabolic disease, the physiology of pain, and the role of nutrition in the development of oral tissues and the maintenance of oral health will also be discussed.
OBIOL 305 Pathology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 42 hours). Introduction to the principles of pathology with consideration of the more common diseases affecting the human body. Visual differentiation between normal and abnormal tissues; the physiological and pathological changes which affect the teeth, their supporting structures and the oral mucosa, including oral manifestations of selected systemic disturbances.
Graduate Courses
OBIOL 500 Oral Biology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Functional anatomy of head and neck, development, structure, function and biochemistry of connective tissues associated with the jaws and cell biology. Course offered in alternate years.
OBIOL 501 Oral Biology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A continuation of Oral Biology I. Craniofacial development and selected topics in physiology. Course offered in alternate years.
OBIOL 607 Conference Seminars in Oral Biology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). This course will include seminars and conferences on selected aspects of oral biology. Continuous evaluation of student preparation and participation throughout the course will be used for assessment. This is an optional course open to students outside the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry by consent of the Chair, Department of Dentistry.
OBIOL 608 Conference Seminars in Oral Biology II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). This is a continuation of DENT 607.
OBIOL 609 Connective Tissue Research Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). This course will critically survey recent research on connective tissues and will aim to provide students practice in communicating research data.
#
Paediatrics
PAED
Department of Paediatrics Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
PAED 546 Paediatrics Student Internship Œ8 (fi 16) (either term, 8 weeks). Student internship in paediatrics for students registered in the MD program.
Graduate Courses
PAED 500 Seminar Course in Paediatric Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A seminar course designed for study of current topics in Child Health Research, specific to the student’s MSc or PhD Program in the Department of Paediatrics. Prerequisite or Corequisites: Normally restricted to graduate students in Paediatrics. Consent of the Department.
PAED 543 Children’s Health and the Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A seminar designed to address the growing evidence and to recognize the role of early life environmental exposures (biological, physical, chemical and social) as major determinants of child and adult health. Prerequisite or Corequisites: Consent of the Department.
PAED 567 Reading Course in Paediatric Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A reading course designed for in-depth, individual study of a specific topic on paediatric medicine related to the student’s MSc or PhD Program in the Department of Paediatrics. Prerequisite or Co-requisites: Normally restricted to graduate students in Paediatrics. Consent of the Department required.
PAED 600 Seminar Course in Paediatric Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). A seminar course designed for study of current topics in Child Health Research, specific to the student’s MSc or PhD Program in the Department of Paediatrics. Prerequisite or Corequisites: Normally restricted to graduate students in Paediatrics. Consent of the Department.
PAED 610 Molecular Mechanisms of Inflammation-Driven Diseases Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A course designed for students at year 2 of graduate studies and beyond. This will be an advanced immunology course centered on an understanding of inflammation and disease. The format of the course will be didactic teaching with 2-3 classes dedicated to seminar discussion of a selected research article. The discussion for this course will be focused on discovery science achievements linked to translational medicine. Restricted to graduate students in year 2 and beyond. Prerequisites of MMI 436/MED 536, Biochemistry 410/510, IMIN452/MMI552 or consent of the course co-ordinator. Open to eligible graduate student from other departments.
PAED 692 Applied Systematic Reviews Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). An applied course covering the principles of systematic reviews of therapeutic interventions relevant to outcomes in child health. Instruction will be provided on evidence-based methods, and students will apply this knowledge to develop their skills in the conduct of a systematic review. Areas covered include the steps involved in conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis, searching the literature, critical appraisal and identification of threats to validity in a systematic review, and statistical analysis. Prerequisite or corequisites: SPH 597 or equivalent and SPH 531 or equivalent, or permission of the instructor.
#
Paleontology
PALEO
Departments of Biological Sciences; Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
PALEO 200 Introduction to Dinosaurs in the Fossil Record =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will learn the fundamental processes of how and what we know about the fossil record, with a special focus on dinosaurs. Topics include fossilization, fossil collection/curation, morphological analysis, organismal evolution, paleoecology, protection of fossils, speciation, stratigraphy, and taphonomy. Students learn how paleontological research determines the ages, behaviour, breeding, life cycles, physiology, sexes and other aspects of the biology of dinosaurs and other extinct animals. This course will be delivered entirely on-line. Prerequisites: Biology 30 or equivalent, or any 100-level course in the Faculty of Science. Note: Students who have obtained credit for PALEO 201 cannot take PALEO 200 for credit.
PALEO 201 Dinosaurs in the Fossil Record =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). For students who want a deeper understanding of the fossil record, this course will augment the topics of PALEO 200 (fossilization, fossil collection/curation, morphological analysis, organismal evolution, paleoecology, protection of fossils, speciation, stratigraphy, and taphonomy) with field trips to regional museums and dig sites. Students will also learn how paleontological research determines the ages, behaviour, breeding, life cycles, physiology, sexes and other aspects of the biology of dinosaurs and other extinct animals. A portion of this course will be delivered on-line. Prerequisites: Biology 30 or equivalent, or any 100-level course in the Faculty of Science. Note: Students who have obtained credit for PALEO 200 cannot take PALEO 201 for credit.
PALEO 202 Early Vertebrate Evolution Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). This course encompasses the origin of vertebrates within chordates and explores the diversity of Palaeozoic lineages within a phylogenetic and evolutionary framework. It will examine the evolution of major vertebrate novelties including the origin of fins, jaws and tetrapod limbs, highlighting key Canadian fossil localities. This course will be delivered entirely online. Course materials and activities include video segments, course notes, and learning and evaluation activities. Prerequisites: PALEO 200 or PALEO 201 or BIOL 108.
PALEO 203 Ancient Marine Reptiles Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). This course explores the evolutionary changes that occur when air-breathing terrestrial animals return to water. It will examine the diversity, adaptations, convergence and phylogenetic relationships of three major groups of extinct marine reptiles-the ichythyosaurs, plesiosaurs, and mosasaurs-in addition to some lesser-known groups. Emphasis will be placed on the fossils and fossil localities of Western Canada. This course will be delivered entirely on-line. Course materials and activities include video segments, course notes, and learning and evaluation activities. Prerequisites: PALEO 200 or PALEO 201 or BIOL 108.
PALEO 204 Theropod Dinosaurs and the Origin of Birds Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0). This course examines the anatomy, diversity, and evolution of theropod dinosaurs in relation to the origin of birds. Particular attention will be paid to the anatomical characters shared by theropods and birds that enabled birds to evolve powered flight. Various hypotheses for the origin of flight will be discussed. Recent discoveries of relevant fossils from Canada will be highlighted. This course will be delivered entirely online. Course materials and activities include video segments, course notes, and learning and evaluation activities. Prerequisites: PALEO 200 or PALEO 201 or BIOL 108.
PALEO 400 Paleontology Field School Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-1s-6). Students will learn the techniques of collection, curation and analysis of fossils at major dinosaur sites in Western Canada. The field component of the course will take place during the summer at a field station off campus. Each student will complete assignments in the field and will prepare a written report for completion by the end of October based on data acquired and methods learned during the field component. Prerequisite: Consent of Department. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 412 Selected Topics in Paleontology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Covers specialized topics of current interest to advanced undergraduates in Biological Sciences and Earth and Atmospheric Sciences. Consult the Paleontology advisor for details about current offerings. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 414 Paleontology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Morphology, paleoecology and evolution, with emphasis on both the theoretical aspects and practical techniques of paleontology. Concentration on invertebrate paleontology, but examples from vertebrate paleontology and paleobotany included. Prerequisite: EAS 230. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 418 Paleobiology of the Lower Vertebrates Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Paleontology, evolution and paleoecology of early vertebrates, fishes, and amphibians, with emphasis on osteology, systematics, major adaptive shifts and subsequent radiations. Prerequisites: ZOOL 325 and any 300 level EAS or Biological Sciences course. Not available to students with credit in PALEO 318. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 419 Paleobiology of the Higher Vertebrates Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Paleontology, evolution and paleoecology of Synapsida (e.g. therapsids and mammals) and Reptilia (e.g. snakes, lizards, dinosaurs, and birds) with emphasis on osteology, systematics, major adaptive shifts and subsequent radiations. Prerequisites: ZOOL 325 and any 300 level EAS or Biological Sciences course. Not available to students with credit in PALEO 319. [Faculty of Science]
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for credit by graduate students: PALEO 418, 419.
PALEO 512 Advanced Selected Topics in Paleontology Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Classes concurrent with PALEO 412. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 513 Advanced Paleontology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Morphology, paleoecology and evolution, with emphasis on both the theoretical aspects and practical techniques of paleontology. Concentration on invertebrate paleontology, but examples from vertebrate paleontology and paleobotany included. Classes concurrent with PALEO 414. Not available to students with credit in PALEO 414. [Faculty of Science]
PALEO 520 Problems in Vertebrate Paleobiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). [Faculty of Science]
#
Persian
PERS
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess background. Students with a Persian language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which background makes them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or nor knowledge in that language. Should students with matriculation standing or those possessing background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
Undergraduate Courses
PERS 111 Beginners’ Persian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to pronunciation, reading, writing and conversation. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or Persian 35 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Not open to students with credit in PERS 100 or RELIG 299.
#
Petroleum Engineering
PET E
School of Mining and Petroleum Engineering Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Faculty of Engineering
The following course was renumbered effective 2009-2010:
Old New
PET E 362 PET E 275
Undergraduate Courses
PET E 275 Petroleum Reservoir Fluids Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Qualitative and quantitative phase behavior of petroleum reservoir fluids through the algebraic and numerical application of thermodynamic theory, equations of state, and empirical correlations. Determination of engineering PVT parameters. Oilfield waters. Introduction to mass transfer. Prerequisite: CHEM 105.
PET E 364 Drilling Engineering Œ4.3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-3/2). Rotary drilling systems, elements of rock mechanics, properties and field testing procedures of drilling fluids, drilling fluids hydraulics, drill bit hydraulics and mechanics, well control, factors affecting rate of penetration, drill string mechanics, fundamentals of directional drilling. Prerequisites: CH E 312 or equivalent and CIV E 270.
PET E 365 Well Logging and Formation Evaluation Œ3.5 (fi 8) (either term, 3-1s-0). Theory and engineering applications of measurements of physical properties of the formation near the well bore; interpretation and use of the information in reservoir engineering. Prerequisite: PET E 275.
PET E 366 Petroleum Production Operations Œ3 (fi 8) (second term, 3-0-0). Land units in Western Canada, types and characteristics of well completions, perforating, wellbore damage and simulation, combined inflow and well performance analysis, multiphase flow through conduits, oil well pumping, gas lift, surface facilities and flow measurement, applied mass transfer. Prerequisite: CH E 312.
PET E 373 Fundamental Reservoir Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Rock properties (porosity, permeability): definition, measurement and models. Rock-fluid interaction (wettability, relative permeability, interfacial tension, capillary pressure): definition, measurement and models. Single and multiphase flow through porous media Darcy equation and diffusivity equation: Derivation and solution for different coordinates and boundary conditions. Prerequisite: PET E 275. PET E 373 cannot be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in PET E 473.
PET E 444 Natural Gas Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include gas properties, reserves estimation, gas well deliverability, gas well testing, gas storage, surface facilities, and transmission. Production of unconventional gas reservoirs (coal beds, hydrates, tight sand and shale gas). Prerequisite: PET E 275.
PET E 471 Enhanced Oil Recovery Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Classification of EOR methods, areal, vertical and volumetric sweep efficiencies, predictive models for immiscible displacement. Frontal advance theory and Buckley-Leverett-Weldge approach. Chemical (alkaline, polymer, surfactant, micellar injection) flooding. Miscible-immiscible gas (hydrocarbon and CO2) injection. Prerequisite: PET E 373.
PET E 475 Applied Reservoir Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 8) (either term, 3-3s/2-0). Reserves estimation. Analysis and prediction of reservoir performance by use of material balance. Primary recovery performance for water influx and solution gas drive reservoirs. Decline curve analysis. Basics of well test analysis. Pressure drawdown and buildup tests. Average reservoir pressure estimation. Drill stem testing and gas well testing. Prerequisite: PET E 373.
PET E 476 Well Completion and Stimulation Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). A design course covering new developments in the area of well engineering. Will include construction, completion, and stimulation of oil/gas wells. Co-requisite: PET E 364.
PET E 477 Modelling in Petroleum Engineering Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Basics of numerical reservoir simulation and numerical solution of partial differential equations. Simulation methods as applied to specific problems in petroleum reservoir behavior. Applications on primary, secondary and tertiary recovery phases of petroleum production using commercial simulation packages. Prerequisites: PET E 373 and CH E 374.
PET E 478 Thermal Methods in Heavy Oil Recovery Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). A design course covering new developments in the area of heavy oil recovery. Will include modeling and designing heavy-oil recovery applications and thermal methods. Prerequisite: PET E 373.
PET E 484 Oil and Gas Property Evaluation Œ3 (fi 8) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of property evaluation as a function of resource type, economics, technology, risk, and policies. Investment decision making tools. Cost information for petroleum exploration, drilling, production and development. Case studies on conventional and unconventional resources. Canadian and international oil and gas regulations. International and regional factors impacting oil and gas prices. Corequisite: ENG M 310 or 401 or equivalent.
PET E 496 Petroleum Engineering Design Project Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 1-6s-0). Designed to deal with special case studies in the mining and petroleum industries; an analysis of reserves; the prediction of production and operating procedures related to the project; the application of economics in the analysis of profitability; economics and planning as tools for a management position. Prerequisite: PET E 484. Note: Restricted to fourth-year traditional and fifth-year co-op engineering students.
Graduate Courses
PET E 630 Advanced Reservoir Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Single and multiphase flow in porous media: concepts of relative permeability, capillary pressure, and wettability. Immiscible and miscible displacement processes in porous media. Overall reservoir performance (tank model): Mechanics of primary production and material balance equation of gas, gas condensate, volatile and black oil reservoirs. Graphical and analytical decline curve analysis. Diffusivity equation and pressure transient in oil and gas reservoirs. Prerequisite: PET E 475 or consent of instructor.
PET E 631 Advanced Production Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Inflow performance relationships. Analysis of multiphase flow through pipes and restrictions using flow correlations and mechanistic methods. Flow pattern prediction for vertical, horizontal and inclined pipes. Total system analysis, production optimization. Design of artificial lift systems. Prerequisite: PET E 366 or consent of instructor.
PET E 633 Advanced Enhanced Oil Recovery Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Evaluation and operation of secondary and tertiary recovery projects; principles of water flooding, chemical flooding and gas flooding techniques. Prerequisite: PET E 471 or consent of instructor.
PET E 636 Computational Methods for Transport Phenomena in Porous Media Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Single and multi-phase flow problems in porous media for compressible and incompressible flow. Multi-dimensional flow will be considered. Analytical, numerical and stochastic flow models will be developed for heterogeneous porous media. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both PET E 635 and PET E 636.
PET E 642 Miscible Gas Injection Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Compositional formulation of flow in porous media. Thermodynamics of phase equilibria. Multiphase behaviour of reservoir fluids in enhanced oil recovery. Characterization of reservoir fluids using an equation of state. Miscible methods; analytical solution, development of miscibility, drive mechanisms, compositional reservoir simulation, and miscible methods in thermal oil recovery. Prerequisite: PET E 630 or consent of instructor.
PET E 649 Advanced Reservoir Simulation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Simulation of recovery processes and various EOR methods such as water flooding, chemical flooding and gas flooding; PVT modeling; multiphase flash, compositional and thermal simulation. Modeling naturally fractured reservoirs. Prerequisite: PET E 477 or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both PET E 649 and PET E 650.
PET E 664 Advanced Drilling Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Recent advances in drilling techniques. Optimization of drilling operational parameters, directional drilling and deviation control, design aspects of horizontal and multilateral well drilling, measurement while drilling, drill string mechanics, bottomhole assembly design, tubular stability, drag and torque problems. Prerequisite: PET E 364 or consent of instructor.
PET E 694 Advanced Topics in Petroleum Engineering Œ3.5 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). An advanced treatment of selected petroleum engineering topics of current interest to staff and students.
PET E 709 Special Topics in Petroleum Engineering Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading Course. Reading and discussion of selected topics in Petroleum Engineering.
PET E 900 Directed Research Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in a Masters of Engineering program.
PET E 910 Directed Research Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). An engineering project for students registered in the joint MBA/MEng program.
#
Pharmacology
PMCOL
Department of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
Note: The following courses may be used by students in the Faculty of Science as science courses: PMCOL 201, 202, 303, 305, 337, 343, 344, 371, 407, 412, 415 and 416, 424, 425, 442 and 498.
PMCOL 201 Introductory Pharmacology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the discipline of pharmacology. What are drugs and how do they bring about their effects? How and why do drugs work in a dose-dependent manner? What happens to a drug after you swallow or inject it? These and related questions are addressed and the underlying pharmacological principles illustrated with a variety of theoretical and real-life examples. Prerequisites: CHEM 101 and BIOL 107. Limited to 2nd and 3rd year students.
PMCOL 300 Introduction to Pharmacology Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 28 hours). Lectures are used to illustrate the principles of pharmacology including rational application of commonly used drugs to the treatment of disease. This course is available only to students registered in the Dental Hygiene Diploma program.
PMCOL 301 Introduction to Research in Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-8). This is a course designed to introduce students to pharmacological research. The students will participate in active research programs being run in the Department of Pharmacology. Restricted to Pharmacology Honors or Specialization students in the third year of their program. There will be a limited number of spaces available.
PMCOL 302 Introduction to Research in Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-8). This is a course designed to introduce students to pharmacological research. The students will participate in active research programs being run in the Department of Pharmacology. Restricted to Pharmacology Honors or Specialization students in the third year of their program. There will be a limited number of spaces available.
PMCOL 303 Introduction to Toxicology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The adverse effects of xenobiotics on biological systems are discussed. Principles of toxicology are introduced. Responses of target organs to selected toxicants are described, with emphasis on molecular mechanisms. Special topics include chemical carcinogenesis, nanotoxicology, and endocrine disruptors. Prerequisites: PMCOL 201 and 202, BIOCH 200, PHYSL 210, or 212 and 214, or consent of Department.
PMCOL 305 An Introduction to the Pharmacology of Drug Abuse =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the complexities of drug abuse and the drugs of abuse. The student will be introduced to the psychological and social problems of drug abuse and their impact upon the abuser. Objectives of the course are to develop an understanding of addiction and a detailed knowledge of the nature of the commonly abused substances. Emphasis will be placed upon the pharmacology of drugs of abuse. Prerequisites: one of the following BIOCH 200, BIOL 201, CELL 201, PHYSL 210, PHSYL 212 and 214, PMCOL 201, PSYCO 275, ZOOL 241 and 242.
PMCOL 337 Experimental Procedures in Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Provides a hands-on experience in addressing basic pharmacological questions. The course will employ both in vitro techniques and behavioural models. Emphasis will be placed on experimental design and data collection, analysis and presentation. Normally restricted to third year Pharmacology Specialization or Honors students. Students not in these programs may be admitted via consent of the instructor if space is available.
PMCOL 343 Scientific Basis of Pharmacology: Part I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course, together with the subsequent PMCOL 344, provides a comprehensive study of the modern science of pharmacology. The objective of the course is to study how drugs act on physiological systems. The areas covered will include neuropharmacology and neuroendocrine pharmacology. This course may be especially useful to those students who wish to pursue a career in health sciences. Prerequisite: PMCOL 201 or PMCOL 202 or equivalent. Pre or corequisite: BIOCH 200 and PHYSL 210, or 212 and 214, or consent of instructor. In the case of over subscription, preference will be given to students in the Pharmacology Specialization or Honors Programs.
PMCOL 344 Scientific Basis of Pharmacology: Part II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A continuation of PMCOL 343 with an emphasis on gastrointestinal pharmacology, chemotherapy of malignant and infectious diseases and pharmacological intervention in metabolic diseases. Prerequisite: PMCOL 343 or consent of instructor. In the case of over subscription, preference will be given to students in the Pharmacology Specialization or Honors Programs.
PMCOL 371 Cellular Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Lectures presented by the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry and the Faculty of Science on nerve cell membranes, ion channels, neurotransmitters and their receptors, synaptic mechanisms and plasticity, gene regulation and development, the physiology of small neural networks and disorders involving basic mechanisms. Prerequisite: PHYSL 210, or 212 and 214, or 252, or ZOOL 242. Students who have taken ZOOL 342 may not receive credit in PMCOL 371.
PMCOL 401 Pharmacology Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-8). Independent research course. “Hands-on” experience is seen as a valuable asset for students graduating from BSc programs. With this in mind, this course provides an opportunity to work with a Faculty member on a research project during the Fall semester. The student and supervisor will mutually agree upon the details of the project. This is an excellent opportunity to learn current laboratory techniques, data analysis, laboratory notebook maintenance and presentation skills. Literature-based projects may also be available in which the student will be required to identify a research question and meet with the supervisor at regular intervals for discussion and guidance on preparation of a term paper and poster presentation. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344. Available only to students in the Pharmacology Specialization program or students who are granted consent by the Department of Pharmacology.
PMCOL 402 Pharmacology Tutorial Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-8). Independent research course. “Hands-on” experience is seen as a valuable asset for students graduating from BSc programs . With this in mind, this course provides an opportunity to work with a Faculty member on a research project during the Winter semester. The student and supervisor will mutually agree upon the details of the project. This is an excellent opportunity to learn current laboratory techniques, data analysis, laboratory notebook maintenance and presentation skills. Literature-based projects may also be available in which the student will be required to identify a research question and meet with the supervisor at regular intervals for discussion and guidance on preparation of a term paper and poster presentation. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344. Available only to students in the Pharmacology Specialization program or students who are granted consent by the Department of Pharmacology.
PMCOL 412 Drugs and the Nervous System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The goal of PMCOL 412 is to learn about the molecular basis of disorders of the nervous system, current therapies in use, as well as novel potential treatments that are in clinical trials or at the preclinical experimental stage. Research frontiers in pain and neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis among others, will be explored. Novel therapeutic targets and the potential treatments of tomorrow will be discussed. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344 or 371 or ZOOL 342 or consent of instructor.
PMCOL 415 Cardiovascular Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical discussion and analysis of current research papers in cardiovascular pharmacology, grouped into themes. Recent developments and use of the literature will be emphasized. In-class participation during roundtable discussion to critique assigned papers is essential. Each theme will be accompanied by the student’s written analyses of papers assigned but not discussed in class, in the format of a condensation/critique. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344. In cases of limited space, preference will be given to students in the Pharmacology program.
PMCOL 416 Current Topics in Endocrine Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines in detail, drugs (including natural hormones) that are used for treatment of endocrine diseases (e.g. diabetes, infertility, and growth deficiency). The focus of the course is the action of drugs on hormone receptors and on the regulation of hormone synthesis and secretion. Prerequisite: PMCOL 343 or 344 or consent of instructor.
PMCOL 425 Problem Solving in Pharmacology and Therapeutics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will be presented with problem cases involving patients with conditions, possibly needing drug therapy. They will identify the issues needing resolution, work collectively to find information to resolve them, and present these and their application to each patient to the group. The group will work to resolve outstanding issues after the presentations. Intended for senior undergraduate students. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344 and consent of Instructor.
PMCOL 450 Diabetes and Its Pharmacotherapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide an overview of the current understanding of blood glucose homeostasis, insulin secretion and action, the actions of other important blood sugar-regulating hormones and the pathology of diabetes. Current pharmacological approaches for lowering blood glucose will be discussed, as will the latest experimental approaches in identifying potential drug targets and new treatments for diabetes. At the end of the course, students should have an appreciation for the mechanisms that control glucose homeostasis in health and diabetes, the diversity of drug targets and mechanisms by which diabetes drugs promote glucose control, and current rationale and lines of research leading to potential new treatments. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344 or consent of instructor.
PMCOL 475 Signal Transduction Systems as Pharmacological Targets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Regulation of various aspects of cell regulation, including proliferation, differentiation, metabolism, survival, motility, and gene transcription, occur mainly via protein phosphorylation in a complex array of well- organized signal transduction pathways. This course will cover topics related to the pharmacological investigation of cellular transduction systems, the discovery of small molecules that alter cell signaling, and how pharmacological manipulation of these signaling pathways may be useful in the drug treatment of a diverse range of diseases, including metastatic, cardiovascular, inflammatory, immune, metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344.
PMCOL 498 Pharmacology Research Program Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-8). During their fourth year all Honors candidates are required to carry out a program of directed research under the supervision of a staff member. This program will be related to the special interest of the student and will involve experimental work as well as two presentations and a written report on the part of the student. Students are encouraged to make arrangements with a supervisor of their choice before the fall term begins. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Normally available to fourth-year Honors students only.
Graduate Courses
Note: Not all graduate courses are offered each year. The Chair of the Department should be consulted regarding the prerequisites for and availability of graduate courses in any academic session.
PMCOL 501 Pharmacology Tutorial, Research, and Reading Course Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). This course is similar to PMCOL 401 except that the course material and student performance will be at a level suitable for graduate students.
PMCOL 502 Pharmacology Tutorial, Research, and Reading Course Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course is similar to PMCOL 401 except that the course material and student performance will be at a level suitable for graduate students.
PMCOL 508 Molecular Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course aims to provide an understanding of the general mechanisms of drug action at the molecular level. Theoretical aspects of drug-receptor interaction are presented in detail followed by a consideration of the mechanisms of signal transduction that have been associated with different receptor types. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PMCOL 510 Advanced Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0).
PMCOL 511 Advanced Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0).
PMCOL 512 Pharmacology of the Synapse Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current concepts of neurotransmitters, neuromodulators and trophic factors are discussed in the context of the normal, diseased and developing nervous systems. Students should have some biological background either in physiology, pharmacology, zoology, or the neurosciences. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PMCOL 514 Biophysical Aspects of Ion Channel Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A comprehensive examination of ion channels and their pharmacology. Topics to be covered include: molecular pharmacology, fundamental principles of bioelectricity, ion channel recording, analysis, classification, molecular biology, structure, pathophysiology and hereditary disease. Prerequisite: consent of the Department
PMCOL 515 Advanced Topics in Cardiovascular Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical discussion and analysis of current research papers in cardiovascular pharmacology, grouped into themes. Recent developments and use of the literature will be emphasized. In-class participation during round table discussion to critique assigned papers is essential. Each theme will be accompanied by the student’s written analyses of papers assigned but not discussed in class, in the format of a condensation/critique. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
PMCOL 525 Problem Solving in Pharmacology and Therapeutics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will be presented with problem cases involving patients with conditions, possibly needing drug therapy. They will identify the issues needing resolution, work collectively to find information to resolve them, and present these and their application to each patient to the group. The group will work to resolve outstanding issues after the presentations. Intended for graduate students. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344 and consent of Instructor.
PMCOL 550 Introduction to the Pharmacology of Diabetes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is intended for graduate students and will provide an overview of the current understanding of blood glucose homeostasis, insulin secretion and action, the actions of other important blood sugar-regulating hormones and the pathology of diabetes. Current pharmacological approaches for lowering blood glucose will be discussed, as will the latest experimental approaches in identifying potential drug targets and new treatments for diabetes. At the end of the course, students should have an appreciation for the mechanisms that control glucose homeostasis in health and diabetes, the diversity of drug targets and mechanisms by which diabetes drugs promote glucose control, and current rationale and lines of research leading to potential new treatments. Prerequisites: PMCOL 343 and 344 or consent of Department.
PMCOL 575 Signal Transduction Systems as Pharmacological Targets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Regulation of various aspects of cell regulation, including proliferation, differentiation, metabolism, survival, motility, and gene transcription, occur mainly via protein phosphorylation in a complex array of well- organized signal transduction pathways. This course will cover topics related to the pharmacological investigation of cellular transduction systems, the discovery of small molecules that alter cell signaling, and how pharmacological manipulation of these signaling pathways may be useful in the drug treatment of a diverse range of diseases, including metastatic, cardiovascular, inflammatory, immune, metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases. Prerequisites: Consent of Department.
PMCOL 612 Drugs and the Nervous System Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Pharmacological management of disease in the central nervous system is presented in the context of current knowledge of neuroscience and neurochemistry. Prerequisites: consent of the Department.
#
Pharmacy
PHARM
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
Undergraduate Courses
PHARM 201 Principles of Medical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to fundamental principles in medicinal chemistry necessary to understand the relationship between drug structure and drug action. The clinical relevance of medicinal chemistry will be explored through examination of drug structure, properties, classification, cell targets, and selected design/development strategies. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 202 Pharmaceutics 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-2). Introduces students to the principles of pharmaceutical dosage forms. This course will focus on factors affecting the physical and chemical behavior of drug products, the rationale underlying their formulation, and compounding techniques of pharmaceutical preparations. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 203 Introduction to Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to fundamental principles of pharmacology that will form the basis for future pharmacotherapy courses. Core concepts of pharmacology, including theoretical aspects of drug-receptor interaction, dose-dependence of drug action, and the effects of drugs on physiological systems will be covered. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 204 Physiology and Anatomy for Pharmacy 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides students with a basic understanding of healthy anatomy and physiology using a systems-based approach relevant to pharmacist’s practice. Students will develop critical thinking, self-directed learning, and collaboration skills as they apply their knowledge of anatomy and physiology. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 205 Physiology and Anatomy for Pharmacy 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Building on PHARM 204, this course provides students with a basic understanding of healthy anatomy, physiology, and immunology using a systems-based approach relevant to pharmacist’s practice. Students will develop critical thinking, self-directed learning, and collaboration skills as they apply their knowledge of anatomy and physiology. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 212 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). This is the first in a series of courses delivered over three years of the program that introduces students to behavioral, administrative, social and evidence-based pharmacy. Topics covered include the pharmacist’s role, drug use control, the health care system, and the patient’s medication experience. Students will develop skills in answering health and medication related questions using evidence based approach. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 213 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Introduces students to the application of jurisprudence and a psychosocial approach to pharmacy. Students will develop skills in personal self-management, leadership, and evaluating experimental and observational study designs. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 220 Patient Care Skills 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). Introduces students to the patient care process and how to apply it, with an emphasis on creating the patient database in a community pharmacy setting. Students will develop fundamental skills required of a pharmacist including communications skills, interprofessional collaboration, medical terminology, pharmaceutical calculations, and drug information. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 223 Patient Care Skills 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-3). Students will apply knowledge and further develop skills using the patient care process, focusing on creating the patient database and introducing patient assessment and pharmacotherapy work-up in a community pharmacy setting in order to prepare the student for practice experiences. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 243 Pharmcotherapy 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). This is the first in a series of courses delivered over three years of the program that provides students with the required knowledge and skills to manage patients’ medication therapy. Topics covered include: complementary and alternative medicine, as well as principles of drug therapy for common self-care and pulmonary conditions. Students will develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills as they learn to incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making into the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 254 Community Service Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). Students develop a client-centred approach to care, including identification of client’s needs, collaboration and professionalism through structured activities. This community service learning experience is offered in conjunction with a structured volunteer program in a residential institution or client care organization. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 300 Experiential Learning - Part 1 Œ1 (fi 2) (two term, 60 hours). In this structured experience course students have the opportunity to adopt a patient-centred approach to care and develop a self-awareness of one’s understanding of the patient’s illness and needs. This service learning experience is offered in conjunction with a structured volunteer program in an institution or with a patient care agency. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 301 Principles of Drug Action - Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry Œ2.5 (fi 5) (first term, 3-0-0 in 13 weeks). Introduction to medicinal chemistry, functional group recognition and properties, drug-receptor interactions, structure- activity relationships, rational drug design and drug development process, drug metabolism and transport. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 302 Pharmaceutics 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Provides students with fundamental knowledge of physicochemical and biological factors that affect the manufacturing, compounding, application, and behaviour of drug products and pharmaceutical dosage forms. This course explores the rationale underlying, as well as the standards governing, the formulation and quality control of pharmaceutical preparations. Emphasis on advanced dosage forms, biologicals as pharmaceuticals, and more complex compounding practices. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 303 Essentials of Pharmacokinetics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides students with fundamental knowledge of pharmacokinetic concepts and their application in devising appropriate patient- specific dosing regimens. Clinical relevance of pharmacokinetics will be explored through the examination of disease states and drug interactions that affect drug concentrations in the body. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 304 Introduction to Core Skills Required of a Health Professional-Drug Information Œ0.5 (fi 1) (first term, 1-2s-2 in 7 weeks). Self-development of requisite of abilities for health professionals - Drug Information. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 305 Experiential Learning - Part 2 Œ4 (fi 8) (Spring/Summer, 160 hours). This structured practical learning experience will allow students to integrate the knowledge and skills they have obtained in the classroom to the actual care of patients in community practice sites. Using the patient care process, they will further develop their patient interviewing skills, prepare pharmacy care plans, and provide patient education on the administration of various dosage forms. Students will also answer drug information questions, participate in health promotion activities and begin to adopt the professional ethics, behaviours and attitudes of a pharmacist. Prerequisites: PHARM 300 (Restricted to Pharmacy students.) Course is offered in Spring Term only.
PHARM 306 Introductory Biomedical Science Œ2.5 (fi 5) (first term, 6-0-0 in 7 weeks). Introduces basic general concepts in the biomedical sciences, as a foundation for the systems blocks which follow in the undergraduate pharmacy curriculum. Integrates cell and tissue function in health and disease with basic principles of drug action and toxicity. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 307 Dermatology, Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat Œ2.5 (fi 5) (second term, 7-2.5s-3 in 5 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to dermatology and eye, ear nose and throat disorders. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 311 Radiopharm and Diagnostic Imaging Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 3-0-0 in 5 weeks). A pharmacy-oriented introduction to radiopharmaceuticals and contemporary diagnostic imaging techniques. Emphasis is placed on basic radiological and radiopharmaceutical principles, instrumentation and clinical concepts. The advantages and limitations of various imaging modalities, including SPET, PET, MRI, x-ray CT and ultrasound are presented. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 312 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will apply ethical frameworks, the legal system, and roles of pharmacy organizations in pharmacy practice. Students will develop skills in creating educational plans, appraising randomized controlled trials, and using written patient information. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 313 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Topics covered include application of pharmacy practice management and patient safety culture to pharmacy practice across settings. Skill development in engaging with patient’s specific cultural or communication needs, working in groups, shared decision making, and appraising synthesized resources and observational research. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 314 Introduction of Core Skills Required of a Health Prof- Communications-Part I Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 1.5-2s-2 in 10 weeks). Self-development of requisite values and abilities for pharmacists. Topics covered include: core communication skills for patient-centered care, critical reflection, and professional communication. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 316 Experiential Learning Part 3 Œ4 (fi 8) (Spring/Summer, 160 hours). This structured practical learning experience will provide an introduction to hospital pharmacy practice and allow students to apply and integrate the knowledge and skills they have obtained in the classroom to the actual care of patients. This course emphasizes pharmacist roles as care providers, communicators, educators, advocates, managers and collaborators. Prerequisite: PHARM305. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 320 Patient Care Skills 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). Students will continue to apply knowledge and develop skills required by a pharmacist to provide patient care, using a systematic process to define and achieve the goals of optimizing safe, effective pharmacotherapy. Students will also continue to develop abilities in professionalism, communication, critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork and self-directed learning. Sessions are designed to facilitate collaborative learning that will be transferable to diverse practice settings, with an introduction to the hospital setting in order to prepare the student for practice experiences. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 321 Pharmacy Biotechnology and Immunology Œ2.5 (fi 5) (first term, 6-0-0 in 7 weeks). An introduction to molecular biology and immunology from a pharmaceutical perspective. The applications of genetic manipulations, immunological approaches, and biotechnological processes for the design of drugs based on nucleic acids and proteins will be discussed. Topics include basic principles, emerging methodologies, and examples of diagnostic and therapeutic applications. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 322 Role of the Pharmacist in the Canadian Health Care System Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 37 hours in 13 weeks). Designed to introduce the student to the profession of pharmacy and its position in the Canadian health care system. Topics covered include: History of Pharmacy, Introduction to the Canadian Health Care System, Roles of the Pharmacist, Concepts of Pharmaceutical Care, Health, Health Promotion, and Health Behaviours. (Restricted to Pharmacy students)
PHARM 323 Patient Care Skills 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-3). Students will apply knowledge and develop skills needed by a pharmacist to provide patient care, using a systematic process to define and achieve the goals of optimizing safe, effective pharmacotherapy. Students will continue to develop abilities in professionalism, communication, critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork and self-directed learning. Students will identify, resolve and prevent drug related problems increasing in complexity, and will further develop their patient education, and drug information skills. Sessions are designed to facilitate collaborative learning that will be transferable to diverse practice settings, with more emphasis on the hospital setting. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 324 Introduction to Core Skills Required of a Health Professional-Evidence Based Medicine Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 8-4s-0 in 5 weeks). Focuses on self-development of requisite abilities for health professionals. Topics covered include: critical appraisal of the literature. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 327 Nutrition Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 6-0-0 in 5 weeks). Physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to nutrition. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 330 Comprehensive Patient Care and Assessment 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). This lab course builds on and integrates knowledge, skills and attitudes developed during the first and second years. A final comprehensive patient care assessment examination is administered. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 331 Pharmaceutics 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 6-1s-3 in 8 weeks). Principles of pharmaceutical dosage forms. Factors affecting the physical and chemical behavior of drug products. Rationale underlying the formulation and compounding techniques of pharmaceutical preparations. (Restricted to Pharmacy students)
PHARM 334 Introduction to Core Skills Required of a Health Professional - Communications - Part 2 Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3-2.5s-0 in 8 weeks). Self-development of requisite values and abilities for health professionals. Topics covered include: communications skills with an emphasis on interpersonal communication and time and stress management. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 341 Pharmacy Math Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 3-0-0 in 6 weeks). Knowledge of pharmacy math and its practical applications to pharmaceutical calculations performed by pharmacists. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 342 Introduction to Drug Use Control Process and Patient Care Œ2.5 (fi 5) (second term, 3-2s-2 in 10 weeks). An introduction to the professional and technical aspects of drug use control, jurisprudence, drug information, and the provision of pharmaceutical care. Communication focuses on the development of basic interpersonal, rapport building, and patient counselling skills relating to the provision of various dosage forms. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 343 Pharmacotherapy 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop a broad understanding of the risk factors and diseases associated with fluid/electrolyte imbalances, as well as major areas of nephrology, urology and endocrinology. They will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 344 Pharmacotherapy 3 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop fundamental knowledge of cardiovascular risk factors and diseases and will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 345 Pharmacotherapy 4 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop the necessary knowledge related to gastrointestinal, nutritional, dermatologic, and ophthalmic conditions and will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 346 Pharmacotherapy 5 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop knowledge related to bacterial infections and will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills building breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 347 Hematology Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 3-2s-0 in 7 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to Hematology. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 351 Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 3-0-0 in 12 weeks). Application of biopharmaceutics and pharmacokinetics to patient care and drug therapy. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 354 Introduction Pharmacy Practice Experience 1 - Community Practice Œ4 (fi 8) (Spring/Summer, 160 hours). This 4 week structured practical learning experience introduces community pharmacy practice and allows students to integrate knowledge and skills to provide patient care under the supervision of a pharmacist. Students will also develop communication, collaboration and practice management skills, as well as participate in health promotion activities and drug information requests in a community pharmacy setting. Students begin to adopt the professional ethics, behaviours, and attitudes of a pharmacist. Prerequisite: PHARM 254. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 357 Gastrointestinal Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 5-4s-0 in 6 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to the gastrointestinal tract and liver. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 361 Pharmaceutics 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 6-6s-3 in 8 weeks). Physicochemical principles of pharmaceutical dosage forms. Factors affecting the physical and chemical behavior of drug products and dosage forms. Rationale underlying the formulation and quality control of pharmaceutical preparations. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 362 Pharmacy Laws and Ethics Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 3-0-0 in 7 weeks). A study of the statutes governing the practice of Pharmacy, an understanding of the legal rights and responsibilities of the pharmacist and a practical application of these laws. Ethical theories and principles and their application in Pharmacy Practice. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 367 Cardiology Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 5.5-8s-0 in 12 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to cardiology. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 372 Pharmacy Management Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 3-0-0 in 13 weeks). An introduction to the elements of pharmacy administration consisting of: management principles, and pharmacy practice management. Provides the student with an understanding of the economic, social, and professional environment of the profession of pharmacy. (Restricted to Pharmacy students)
PHARM 377 Immunotherapeutics and Transplant Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 3-9s-0 in 5 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to immunology and transplant. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 382 Provincial and Canadian Healthcare Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0 in 12 weeks). An examination of healthcare and its issues from a pharmacy perspective within the context of the Canadian health care system. The course will provide a review of the health care; identify key problems, issues, and solutions in regards to delivering pharmacy services; review key stakeholders roles, responsibilities and relationships (current and future); and review issues relating to pharmacy as a profession and a business. (Restricted to pharmacy students).
PHARM 387 Pediatrics / Geriatrics Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3-3s-0 in 4 weeks). An integrated science and therapeutics-based course covering the relevant material relating to the physiology, pathophysiology, clinical toxicology, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, therapeutics, and new or future advances in the treatment and management of age-related issues in special populations. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 392 Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacy Practice Research Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3-1s-0 in 9 weeks). An introduction to understanding the basic principles and concepts of pharmacoepidemiology and health services research relevant to pharmacy practice. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 397 Lab Values, Urology and Nephrology Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 3-4s-0 in 12 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to lab values, fluids, electrolytes urology and nephrology. (Restricted to Pharmacy students)
PHARM 401 Toxicology and Pharmacogenomics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Provides students with fundamental knowledge of toxicologic and pharmacogenomic concepts and their application in patient care. Clinical relevance of toxicology will be explored through the examination of drug toxicity to specific target organs and approaches to managing poisoning and adverse drug reactions. Principles and clinical applications of pharmacogenomics will be explored with relevance to drug metabolism, transport and drug targets. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 407 Infectious Diseases 1 Œ4 (fi 8) (first term, 6-2s-0 in 12 weeks). Microbiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, pathophysiology, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to infectious diseases. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 412 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 5 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will differentiate levels of care in the health care system and plan to advocate for patient needs. Students will apply laws and jurisprudence to complex practice issues. Skill development in preceptorship, self- directed learning, managing sensitive topics and evaluation of clinical practice guidelines, pharmacoeconomic studies, qualitative research, and diagnostic tests. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 413 Behavioural, Administrative, Social and Evidence-based Pharmacy 6 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Students will design, plan, and evaluate a new pharmacy service drawing on expertise in behavioral, administrative, social and evidence-based pharmacy. Students will learn to integrate fundamental topics including: business planning, program evaluation, social theory, and pharmacy practice research. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 417 Neurology Œ2.5 (fi 5) (first term, 8-3s-0 in 5 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to the central nervous system. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 420 Patient Care Skills 5 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). Focus will be on advanced practice concepts including prescribing and the application of the patient care process to more complex patient scenarios and chronic diseases. Further development of skills in patient assessment, communication, medication therapy management, and evidence based practice will be undertaken within the context of various practice environments. Peer mentoring and lifelong learning will also be examined. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 423 Patient Care Skills 6 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-0-3). Focus is on advanced practice concepts including patient assessment, communication, medication therapy management, and evidence based practice along with critical thinking and decision-making skills to address complex drug therapy problems. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 426 Experiential Learning - Part 4 Œ8 (fi 16) (either term or Spring/Summer, 320 hours). This structured practical learning experience will allow students to apply and integrate knowledge and skills in community practice settings. Students will develop practical knowledge necessary for the professional role of pharmacists as care providers, communicators, scholars, advocates, managers and collaborators. Students are expected to step into the role of a pharmacist under the guidance of a pharmacist preceptor. Prerequisite: PHARM 315. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 427 Pain Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 3-4s-0 in 10 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to non-malignant pain management. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 428 Experiential Learning - Part 5 Œ8 (fi 16) (either term or Spring/Summer, 320 hours). This structured practical learning experience will allow students to apply and integrate knowledge and skills in institutional practice settings. Students will develop practical knowledge necessary for the professional role of pharmacists as care providers, communicators, scholars, advocates, managers and collaborators. Students are expected to step into the role of a pharmacist under the guidance of a pharmacist preceptor. Prerequisite: PHARM 315. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 430 Comprehensive Patient Care and Assessment 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, variable). This lab course builds on and integrates knowledge, skills and attitudes developed throughout the curriculum. A final comprehensive patient care assessment examination is administered. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 437 Bone and Joint Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 7.5-3s-0 in 4 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to bone and joint disorders. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 443 Pharmacotherapy 6 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop fundamental knowledge in the areas of reproductive and sexual health, as well as musculoskeletal/joint conditions and will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios, with increasing complexity. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 444 Pharmacotherapy 7 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop knowledge of various types of pain and oncologic conditions and complications and will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to various patient care scenarios. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 445 Pharmacotherapy 8 Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop knowledge in the areas of neurologic and psychiatric conditions. They will apply therapeutic and pharmaceutical science knowledge to patient care scenarios, with added complexity. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence-based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 446 Pharmacotherapy 9 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). This course will familiarize students with geriatrics, pediatrics and other special populations. Students will expand their knowledge and skills regarding these populations and will apply therapeutic knowledge in the context of a bio-psycho-social health model for patient centred care. Students will further develop their critical thinking and advocacy skills related to decision making and care for special populations. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 447 Psychiatry Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 9-3s-0 in 4 weeks). Pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for psychiatric conditions. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 448 Pharmacotherapy 10 Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Students will develop foundational knowledge related to select fungal, viral and protozoal infections, as well as in the area of transplant. In addition, this course will provide students with fundamental knowledge and skills (patient assessment) in disease prevention through delivery of immunizations and traveller’s health services. Students will further develop their critical thinking and self-directed learning skills, along with their breadth and depth of therapeutic knowledge, as they incorporate principles of evidence- based therapeutic decision making within the patient care process framework. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 450 Special Topics in Pharmacy Œ1-6 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, variable). Consult the Faculty for the specific topics offered. Prerequisite: Consent of the Faculty.
PHARM 452 Pharmacy Practice - Design and Function Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0 in 12 weeks). An interprofessional team course that involves the design of specific artifacts to meet health care needs using principles of universal design, health, function, and patient-centred care. Enrollment is limited and is by permission of the instructor(s). (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 453 Intercultural Exploration of Pharmacy and Health Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). This course explores the relationship between culture, diet, lifestyle and health in a Mediterranean environment. Students will examine factors that influence health, including the geo-political, socioeconomic, and cultural factors. Patient care and pharmacist roles in the prevention and/or management of chronic disease are considered. This course is taught in Italy. Please contact the Faculty for additional information. (Restricted to Pharmacy students entering the fourth year of the program.) Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
PHARM 454 Introductory Pharmacy Practice Experience 2 - Acute Care Practice Œ4 (fi 8) (Spring/Summer, 160 hours). This 4 week structured practical learning experience introduces acute care practice and allows students to integrate knowledge and skills to provide patient care in a hospital setting under the supervision of a pharmacist. This course emphasizes pharmacist roles including communication, collaboration, practice management, evidence-based practice, and professional responsibilities in an acute care setting. Prerequisite: PHARM 354. (Restricted to Pharmacy students)
PHARM 455 Specialty Pharmacy Rotation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 120 hours). Consists of 120 hours in a practice area, on a full-time or part-time basis. Students are required to prepare a proposal for the placement with desired objectives, activities and an evaluation mechanism. The proposal is to be agreed to by the Course Coordinator and the Rotation Supervisor. The placement will be conducted under the coordination of the Rotation Supervisor at the practice site. The student is also required to prepare a report on the outcomes of the placement in the form of a portfolio. Travel and accommodation costs are the responsibility of the student. Prerequisites: Dependent on specialty and consent of Faculty. This course may be taken during the Spring/Summer Term by special arrangement. This course may be repeated once. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 467 Oncology Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 6.5-2s-0 in 5 weeks). Basic science of oncology, anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to cancer. (Restricted to Pharmacy students and to graduate students in Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences).
PHARM 477 Infectious Diseases 2 Œ4 (fi 8) (second term, 6-3s-0 in 13 weeks). Pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, pathophysiology, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to infectious diseases. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 481 Veterinary Pharmacology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course in the commonly used veterinary biological and pharmaceutical preparations; general sanitary and management procedures for the prevention and control of livestock diseases; a brief review of infectious diseases and animal parasites.
PHARM 487 Pulmonary Œ2 (fi 4) (first term, 7-6s-0 in 5 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to the pulmonary system. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 489 Seminars in Therapeutics and Professional Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A seminar course for fourth year pharmacy students covering selected topics in therapeutics, pharmacokinetics and clinical pharmacy. (Restricted to fourth year Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 494 Pharmacy Management: Selected Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Continuation of PHARM 372 with emphasis on financial management and the management of human resources. Projects on pharmacy operations. Prerequisite: PHARM 372.
PHARM 497 Endocrine Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 3-2s-0 in 11 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to the endocrine system. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
PHARM 498 Research and Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). Investigational work under the supervision of a member of the Faculty. Preparation of a written report and presentation are required. Prerequisites: consent of the Faculty and the approval of a Faculty member to supervise the research or project. This course may be taken during Spring/Summer by special arrangement. Credit may be obtained for this course more than once.
PHARM 499 Women’s and Men’s Health Œ2 (fi 4) (second term, 6-3s-0 in 6 weeks). Anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, toxicology, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutics and pharmacy practice relating to the pharmacist’s role in providing patient care for conditions relating to women’s and men’s health. (Restricted to Pharmacy students).
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for credit by graduate students: PHARM 481, 494.
PHARM 501 Critical Analysis of Evidence in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Focus is on the synthesis of evidence from various sources and addresses complex issues in pharmacy practice to build on the student’s understanding of study design, evidence-based clinical practice, and critical appraisal. Students will gain experience by using a variety of information sources to discuss drug information assignments and practice enhancement issues. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 502 Advanced Patient Care Skills and Health Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Features health assessment, the patient care process, care planning, and documentation as fundamental elements of a framework for patient-centred care. Incorporates lab-based simulations and assignments to provide students with the opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills required for practice. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 503 Advanced Pharmacotherapy Œ6 (fi 12) (first term, 6-1s-0). Explores selected pharmacotherapy topics and provides an opportunity for students to integrate knowledge and skills. Topics will be explored using the primary literature to critically evaluate emerging controversies and therapeutic dilemmas and addresses advanced skills and knowledge required for monitoring outcomes of drug therapy including interpreting drug levels and adjusting therapy. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students or with Faculty consent.) Pre or corequisites: PHARM 501 and 502, or consent of the Faculty.
PHARM 504 Frameworks for Teams, Collaboration and Education in Pharmacy Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Provides students with the theoretical foundations to prepare them for practice in an interprofessional team environment and the preparation of and ongoing learning of professionals, and education of patients and groups of patients. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 505 PharmD Seminars Œ1-3 (variable) (variable, variable). This capping course is designed to evaluate students’ ability to integrate knowledge and skills in pharmacy practice. Provides a forum throughout the program for students to integrate experience gained through coursework with experiential learning. A conference style presentation, poster, paper and professional portfolio are required. Course may be repeated. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 511 PharmD Experiential Learning Part 1 Œ6 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, 240 Hours in 6 Weeks). The PharmD student will be expected to demonstrate professional competencies in the provision of patient care. Direct patient care activities will include health assessment, therapeutic drug monitoring, provision of drug information, and contributing to patient care as part of an interprofessional team. Prerequisites: PHARM 501, 502, 503, 504 or with Faculty consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students.)
PHARM 512 PharmD Experiential Learning Part 2 Œ6 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, 240 Hours in 6 Weeks). The PharmD student will be expected to demonstrate professional competencies in the provision of patient care. Direct patient care activities will include health assessment, therapeutic drug monitoring, provision of drug information, and contributing to patient care in an acute care setting. Prerequisites: PHARM 501, 502, 503, 504 or with Faculty consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students.)
PHARM 513 PharmD Experiential Learning Part 3 Œ6 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, 240 Hours in 6 Weeks). The PharmD student will be expected to demonstrate professional competencies in the provision of patient care. Direct patient care activities will include health assessment, therapeutic drug monitoring, provision of drug information, and contributing to patient care in an ambulatory or community practice setting. Prerequisites: PHARM 501, 502, 503, 504 or with Faculty consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students.)
PHARM 514 PharmD Elective Rotation Œ6 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, 240 Hours in 6 Weeks). The PharmD student will complete a placement in a patient-care practice setting as outlined in PHARM 511, 512 or 513. Credit may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: PHARM 501, 502, 503, 504 or with Faculty consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students.)
PHARM 515 PharmD Specialty Elective Œ6 (fi 12) (either term or Spring/Summer, 240 hours). PharmD students are required to design and complete a practice-based placement including objectives, activities and an assessment mechanism. The placement proposal is subject to approval by the preceptor and the Course Coordinator. Travel and accommodation costs are the responsibility of the student. Credit may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: PHARM 501, 502, 503, 504 or with Faculty consent. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students.)
PHARM 521 Critical Analysis of Evidence in Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Focus is on the synthesis of evidence from various sources and addresses complex issues in pharmacy practice to build on the student’s understanding of study design, evidence-based clinical practice, and critical appraisal. Students will gain experience by using a variety of information sources to discuss drug information assignments and practice enhancement issues. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 522 Advanced Patient Care Skills and Health Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Features health assessment, the patient care process, care planning, and documentation as fundamental elements of a framework for patient-centred care. Incorporates lab-based simulations and assignments to provide students with the opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills required for practice. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 523 Advanced Pharmacotherapy - Part 1 Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Explores selected pharmacotherapy topics and provides an opportunity for students to integrate knowledge and skills. Topics will be explored using the primary literature to critically evaluate emerging controversies and therapeutic dilemmas and addresses advanced skills and knowledge required for monitoring outcomes of drug therapy including interpreting drug levels and adjusting therapy. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students or with Faculty consent.) Prerequisites: PHARM 521 and 522, or consent of the Faculty. Corequisites: PHARM 524.
PHARM 524 Frameworks for Teams, Collaboration and Education in Pharmacy Practice - Part 1 Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). Provides students with the theoretical foundations to prepare them for collaborative practice in an interprofessional team environment. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent. Corequisites: PHARM 523.
PHARM 525 PharmD Seminars - Part 1 Œ1 (fi 2) (Spring/Summer, variable). This capping course is designed to evaluate students’ ability to integrate knowledge and skills in pharmacy practice. Provides a forum for students to integrate experience gained through coursework taken to date with their professional practice. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 531 Critical Analysis of Evidence Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). This course focuses on the application of evidence from various sources to address complex issues in pharmacy practice. It will build on students’ prior knowledge of study design, evidence-based clinical practice, and critical appraisal. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.)
PHARM 532 Patient Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). This course focuses on assessment within the pharmacy patient care process. It incorporates lab-based simulations and assignments to provide students with the opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills essential to contemporary practice. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.)
PHARM 533 Advanced Pharmacotherapy - Part 2 Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Explores selected pharmacotherapy topics and provides an opportunity for students to integrate knowledge and skills. Topics will be explored using the primary literature to critically evaluate emerging controversies and therapeutic dilemmas and addresses advanced skills and knowledge required for monitoring outcomes of drug therapy including interpreting drug levels and adjusting therapy. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD students or with Faculty consent.) Prerequisites: PHARM 523, or consent of the Faculty. Corequisites: PHARM 534.
PHARM 534 Frameworks for Teams, Collaboration and Education in Pharmacy Practice - Part 2 Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). Provides students with the theoretical foundations to prepare them for collaborative practice in an interprofessional team environment. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent. Corequisites: PHARM 533.
PHARM 535 PharmD Seminars - Part 2 Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This capping course is designed to evaluate students’ ability to integrate knowledge and skills in pharmacy practice. Provides a forum for students to integrate experience gained through coursework with their professional practice and experiential learning. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.) Corequisites: PHARM 511 or 512 or 513 or 514or 515.
PHARM 536 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience - Selective in Patient Care Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). Students will be expected to demonstrate professional competencies in the provision of direct patient care in this 8 week practice experience in any care setting. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.)
PHARM 537 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience - Elective Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). This course provides an opportunity for students to develop a learning plan for this 8 week practice experience in any professional setting. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.)
PHARM 538 PharmD Seminars Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This seminar course integrates practice experiences with ongoing professional learning. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.) Corequisites: One of PHARM 426, 428, 536 or 537.
PHARM 539 PharmD Seminars Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This seminar course integrates practice experiences with ongoing professional learning. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.) Corequisites: One of PHARM 426, 428, 536 or 537.
PHARM 543 PharmD Integrating Seminar Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This capping course facilitates integration of knowledge and skills with pharmacy practice throughout the fourth year of the program. Activities include clinical discussions, presentations, and professional portfolio. Corequisites: One of PHARM 554, 555, 556 or 557. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 544 Frameworks for Teams, Collaboration and Education in Pharmacy Practice - Part 3 Œ1 (fi 2) (Spring/Summer, variable). Provides students with the theoretical foundations to prepare ongoing learning of professionals, and education of patients and groups of patients. This course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.)
PHARM 545 PharmD Seminars - Part 3 Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This capping course is designed to evaluate students’ ability to integrate knowledge and skills in pharmacy practice. Provides a forum for students to integrate experience gained through coursework with their professional practice and experiential learning. This distance learning course is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. (Restricted to PharmD Students or with Faculty consent.) Corequisites: PHARM 511 or 512 or 513 or 514 or 515.
PHARM 546 PharmD Integrating Seminar Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, variable). This capping course facilitates integration of knowledge and skills with pharmacy practice throughout the fourth year of the program. Activities include clinical discussions, presentations, and professional portfolio. Corequisites: One of PHARM 554, 555, 556 or 557. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 547 Advanced Therapeutics, Collaboration and Professional Learning Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). This course provides an opportunity for students to direct their own learning to strengthen the process of care and increase their depth of knowledge using selected pharmacotherapy topics, group learning and collaboration. Students will focus on using evidence, decision-making, monitoring outcomes of drug therapy, and adjusting therapy. (Restricted to PharmD for BScPharm Students.)
PHARM 554 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience 1 - Community Practice Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). This 8-week structured practical learning experience will allow students to apply and integrate knowledge and skills in a community pharmacy setting. Students will develop practical knowledge necessary for the professional role of pharmacists as care providers, communicators, scholars, educators, advocates, practice managers, leaders and collaborators. Students are expected to step into the role of a pharmacist under the guidance of a pharmacist preceptor. Prerequisite: PHARM 354.(Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 555 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience 2 - Acute Care Practice Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). This 8-week structured practical learning experience will allow students to apply and integrate knowledge and skills in an acute care setting. Students will develop practical knowledge necessary for the professional role of pharmacists as care providers, communicators, scholars, educators, advocates, practice managers, leaders and collaborators. Students are expected to step into the role of a pharmacist under the guidance of a pharmacist preceptor. Prerequisite: PHARM 454. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 556 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience 3 - Selective Patient Care Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). This 8-week structured practical learning experience will allow students to apply and integrate knowledge and skills in any patient care setting . Students will develop practical knowledge necessary for the professional role of pharmacists as care providers, communicators, scholars, educators, advocates, practice managers, leaders and collaborators. Students are expected to step into the role of a pharmacist under the guidance of a pharmacist preceptor. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 557 Advanced Pharmacy Practice Experience 4 - Elective Œ8 (fi 16) (variable, 320 hours). This 8 week structured practical learning experience provides students an opportunity to expand their knowledge and skills in other areas of professional practice including patient care and non-patient care settings. Students will be responsible for development of their own learning plan including outcomes that demonstrate how they have achieved their goals. (Restricted to Pharmacy students.)
PHARM 564 Toxicology of Pharmaceutical Agents and Related Xenobiotics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). Biochemical and molecular mechanisms of drug- induced damage. Key concepts include toxicological principles, toxicokinetics, toxic responses, bioactivation of drugs to toxic metabolites, organ directed toxicity, immunotoxicology, and receptor-mediated toxicity. Specialized topics include clinical and medical toxicology, forensic toxicology, pharmacoepidemiology related to drug toxicity, safety assessment of pharmaceutical agents, and environmental toxicology. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PHARM 566 Cellular Aspects of Drug Delivery and Targets Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-1s-0). The goals of this course are to discuss fundamental topics in cell and molecular biology and introduce students to important concepts in cellular structure and function as they relate to the design and development of novel drugs. Drug targets for macromolecules, including vaccines, proteins and genetic material will be emphasized. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PHARM 570 Advanced Pharmaceutical Analysis - Spectroscopy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Applications of instrumental methods of analysis (ultraviolet and infrared spectroscopy; NMR; mass spectrometry; atomic absorption spectroscopy) to pharmaceutical compounds. Offered in odd-numbered years. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PHARM 573 Analytical Techniques in Pharmaceutical Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The course emphasizes the key skills required to study and explore recent trends in pharmaceutical analysis and the latest analytical technologies. The core analytical techniques such as chromatography, LC-MS, ELISA, and, electrophoresis will be discussed in detail along with hands- on experience during laboratory sessions. Prerequisite: PHARM 570 or consent of the Faculty. Offered alternate years.
PHARM 580 Introduction to Computer-Aided Drug Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). An introductory course designed to provide students with the background and a hands-on understanding of techniques involved in computer-aided drug design, including bioinformatics, molecular modelling, molecular simulation, docking and QSAR. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
PHARM 589 Pharmacy in Neoplastic Disease Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Description of neoplastic disease, its prevalence and drug treatment with an emphasis on patient management. There is an emphasis on the pharmacists’ role in preparing chemotherapy medication, minimizing toxic effects of cancer drugs, dosage considerations, concomitant use of medication for other diseases and psychosocial aspects of care. Students will also learn about newer forms of treatments and changes in the provision of treatment services. Restricted to Pharmacy graduate students.
PHARM 593 Advanced Radiopharmaceutical Sciences II Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). Application of radionuclides in medical diagnosis and treatment; control of radionuclides in the hospital. Laboratory: preparation, quality control and clinical utility of currently used radiopharmaceuticals in nuclear medicine. Prerequisite: PHARM 601 or consent of Faculty.
PHARM 595 Clinical Rotations Œ6 (fi 12) (two term). A clinical experience which will provide the student with the opportunity to practice clinical pharmacy in several speciality areas. The student will be expected to demonstrate professional competence in patient counselling, obtaining medication histories, providing drug information, applied pharmacokinetics and related areas. Credit will be granted after the completion of 900 hours of approved clinical training.
PHARM 596 Pharmaceutical Marketing Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An examination of the process of marketing pharmaceuticals in Canada. Topics to be covered are: pre-marketing requirements, regulatory control over drugs, price and product competition, promotion and advertising of pharmaceuticals, channels of distribution, packaging, ethics, price, and group purchasing. The course stresses the unique factors to be considered in marketing pharmaceuticals. Prerequisite: PHARM 372.
PHARM 601 Isotope Tracer Methodology I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Fundamental principles of radioactivity and health physics. The importance of radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture, industry, and research. Problems and limitations in the use of radioisotopes as tracers. Instrumentation and analysis methods. Experimental procedures, application of methods of analysis and criteria for evaluation of results. Laboratory: handling and preparation of radioisotopes for counting. Counting procedures. Tracer chemical and biochemical analyses.
PHARM 606 Current Topics in Bionucleonics and Radiopharmacy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Assigned readings, tutorials and seminars in recent advances in the fields of bionucleonics and radiopharmacy, conducted under the direction of several faculty members. Prerequisites: PHARM 601, 603, 604 or consent of Faculty.
PHARM 610 Advanced Drug Delivery Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The focus of this course is on the design and development of novel delivery systems for various treatment and diagnostic applications. A particular attention will be paid to the physicochemical principles behind the development of different drug delivery systems, their biological application and significance. Emphasis is given to polymer based systems and assembled nano-carriers for the delivery of therapeutic drugs, proteins, vaccines and genes. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PHARM 611 Pharmaceutical Formulation and Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-2). Theoretical considerations basic to the technology of pharmaceutical dosage forms to meet the requirements of therapeutic efficacy, stability, and safety. Laboratory: development and formulation of pharmaceutical products. Prerequisite: consent of Faculty.
PHARM 615 Advanced Pharmacokinetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course deals with the theoretical aspects of pharmacokinetics. Compartmental and non-compartmental theories are treated in depth. The application of these theories is made in various areas where kinetics are involved. Prerequisite: PHARM 351 or equivalent or consent of Faculty. Note: Offered alternate years.
PHARM 624 Application of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy to Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic interpretation and examples of use of NMR spectroscopy in problems of pharmaceutical synthesis and its studies of the mode of action of medicinally active compounds. Prerequisite: consent of Faculty. Note: Offered alternate years.
PHARM 630 The Metabolism and Excretion of Drugs Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The chemistry, biochemistry and kinetics of drug metabolism together with the factors affecting metabolism; the practical aspects of in vitro and in vivo studies of drug metabolism; the excretion of drugs by various routes and factors affecting excretion, the kinetics of excretion. Note: Offered alternate years.
PHARM 690 Advanced Seminar in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Assigned readings, tutorials, and seminars on recent advances and methodological approaches in Pharmacy, conducted under the direction of academic staff members in the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.
PHARM 694 Directed Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). Directed studies in pharmaceutical research, using one or more techniques of special interest to individual students. Prerequisites: consent of the Faculty and the supervising faculty member.
PHARM 697 Graduate Seminar Œ0 (fi 1) (two term, 0-1s-0). Seminar training and short seminar presentations on topics related to the student’s field of research. Normally, the seminar will be presented during the student’s second or third term. Required of all MSc and PhD students.
PHARM 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned).
#
Philosophy
PHIL
Department of Philosophy Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) No junior course presupposes background in Philosophy. PHIL 101, 102, and 120 are recommended for all students intending to continue in Philosophy. Courses at the 200-level are intended to provide a foundation for further study in Philosophy.
(2) There are no formal prerequisites for 200- or 300-level courses (except for PHIL 220). Entrance to 400-level courses requires *6 of prior courses in PHIL, at least three of which must be at the 200-level.
Undergraduate Courses
PHIL 101 Introduction to Philosophy: Values and Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). An introduction to the classical problems of philosophy through study and critical discussion of selected philosophical classics and contemporary works. Emphasis will be placed on questions of moral and other values and on the nature of society and justice.
PHIL 102 Introduction to Philosophy: Knowledge and Reality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). An introduction to the classical problems of philosophy through study and critical discussion of selected philosophical classics and contemporary works. Emphasis will be placed on questions of the nature and extent of human knowledge and classic problems about the nature of reality and our place in it.
PHIL 103 Critical Thinking, Reading, and Writing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to some central topics in philosophy, with frequent writing assignments and a minimum 30% of class time devoted to writing instruction. Note: Credit cannot be obtained for both PHIL 103 and any of PHIL 101, 102, or 125.
PHIL 120 Symbolic Logic I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of sentential logic, including translation, semantics, decision procedures and natural deduction followed by an introduction to predicate logic, concentrating on translation. Note: Not open to students with credit in PHIL 220.
PHIL 125 Practical Logic =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elementary methods and principles for analyzing reasoning as it occurs in everyday contexts. Topics may include informal fallacies, introduction to scientific method, elementary statistical reasoning, elementary sentential logic, as well as the study of argument in contemporary debates about issues of social concern.
PHIL 200 Metaphysics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic questions concerning the nature of reality. Topics may include existence, materialism and idealism, freedom and determinism, appearance and reality, causality, identity, time and space, universals and particulars.
PHIL 205 Philosophy of Mind =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic questions concerning the mind and our attempts to study it scientifically.
PHIL 215 Epistemology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of such central topics in the theory of knowledge as truth and rationality, skepticism and the limits of knowledge, relativism and the objectivity of knowledge, the role of perception, memory and reason as sources of knowledge.
PHIL 217 Biology, Society, and Values =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The philosophical and social impact of historical and contemporary topics in the biological sciences.
PHIL 220 Symbolic Logic II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A brief review of sentential logic followed by an intensive study of predicate logic with identity. Topics include translation, semantics, decision procedures, natural deduction systems, mathematical induction. Other topics include: theories of definite descriptions, elementary modal logic, formal axiomatic systems. Prerequisite: PHIL 120 or consent of Department.
PHIL 230 Ancient Greek Philosophy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the thought of the ancient Greek world from its beginnings with the Pre-Socratics up to and including Aristotle.
PHIL 233 Trial and Execution of Socrates =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A philosophical examination of Socrates’ death in its cultural, historical and political setting.
PHIL 240 Descartes to Hume =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of Philosophy in the 17th- and 18th centuries. Philosophers studied will include Descartes, Leibniz, Spinoza, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume.
PHIL 250 Contemporary Ethical Issues =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of questions of right and wrong, good and evil, and the application of ethical theories to practical issues.
PHIL 265 Philosophy of Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the central issues in contemporary philosophy of science. Topics may include theory evaluation, paradigm shifts and theory change, laws of nature, causation and explanation, the rationality of science and its social and historical setting.
PHIL 270 Political Philosophy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of issues in contemporary political philosophy with attention to liberalism and communitarianism, sovereignty, feminism, entitlement and distribution, and global justice.
PHIL 272 Feminist Philosophy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to feminist issues in current philosophy. Note: Not open to students with credit in PHIL 332.
PHIL 280 Philosophy of Art =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to some of the traditional theories, such as the expressionist and the formalist theories, which investigate the nature and function of the arts. The nature of aesthetic experience will also be considered.
PHIL 291 Existentialism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the background and main themes of existentialist philosophy. Authors such as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Sartre are considered.
PHIL 302 Indian Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course focuses on the ancient and classical period of Indian philosophy (500 BCE-1500 CE); major metaphysical and ethical concepts within traditions such as Yoga, Advaita Vedanta, and Buddhism. Note: Not open to students with credit in PHIL 301 completed prior to 2012.
PHIL 305 Philosophy of Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Central topics at the interface of philosophy and psychology. Prerequisite: PHIL 205, or two courses in Psychology, or consent of Department.
PHIL 317 Philosophy of Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Core topics at the interface of biology and philosophy.
PHIL 325 Risk, Choice, and Rationality =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the formal theory of rationality including probability and induction, and elementary decision theory, with attention to the paradoxes of choice.
PHIL 333 Aristotle Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth study of the philosophy of Aristotle.
PHIL 336 Medieval and Renaissance Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A historical survey of western philosophy from the end of classical antiquity until the sixteenth century.
PHIL 343 Kant to Nietzsche Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the philosophy of Kant and the 19th century. Philosophers studied will include Kant, Hegel, Marx, the Utilitarians, and Nietzsche. Note: Not open to students with credit in PHIL 245.
PHIL 345 Humans and Animals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Philosophical approaches to the question of comparative human and animal cognition, emotion, awareness, and language. The course will also address the problem of animal rights vis-à-vis individual and institutional human interests.
PHIL 350 Foundations of Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A philosophical investigation of theoretical questions about ethics, such as whether ethical values are objective or subjective, why we should be moral, whether virtues really exist, what role reason plays in ethical deliberation, and what constitutes the basis of our ethical obligations.
PHIL 355 Environmental Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Philosophical dimensions of issues raised by our relationship to the environment.
PHIL 357 Philosophy of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). General topics in the Philosophy of Religion, which may include the concept of ‘religion,’ the existence of God, meaning and intelligibility in religious language, religion and morality, implications of the social scientific study of religion.
PHIL 365 Philosophy of Computing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on artificial intelligence, artificial life, and virtual reality. No previous familiarity with computing is necessary.
PHIL 366 Computers and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A philosophical examination of moral and social issues arising from the computer revolution. Possible topics include hacking, internet culture, smart environments and cyborgs.
PHIL 367 Introduction to Philosophy of Mathematics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of approaches to the foundations of mathematics and of philosophical issues concerning the nature of mathematical objects, mathematical theories and the special status of mathematics among the sciences and other areas of knowledge.
PHIL 368 Topics in Social Justice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
PHIL 372 Philosophy of Sexuality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Ontological, epistemological, political and ethical issues arising through readings of classical and contemporary texts.
PHIL 375 Science and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A broadly based introduction to the intellectual, cultural, and social dimensions of science and their implications. Topics may include the impact of the Newtonian revolution, mechanism, materialism and Darwinism, and the nature of objectivity and rationality.
PHIL 380 Philosophy of Criticism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the philosophical foundations of art criticism. Questions concerning the standards of interpretation and of evaluation of the arts will be given special attention.
PHIL 383 Film and Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of philosophical issues raised by films: distinguishing film from other arts (photography, theatre, video games), whether films depict or represent reality, emotional engagement, the relation of moral and aesthetic values, and approaches to film criticism.
PHIL 384 Topics in Practical Ethics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
PHIL 386 Health Care Ethics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of ethical issues that arising in health care and in the practice of health professions.
PHIL 396 Third-Year Honors Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Note: For students in the third year of the Honors program.
PHIL 400 Topics in Metaphysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 401 Topics in Epistemology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 405 Topics in Philosophy of Mind Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 411 Philosophy of Space and Time Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected theories and problems concerning the nature of space and time. A strong background in philosophy, mathematics, or physical sciences is desirable. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 412 Topics in Philosophy of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 415 Topics in Philosophy of Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of the Department.
PHIL 420 Metalogic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theoretical study of formal systems of logic. Topics include formal axiomatic systems, formal syntax and semantics, soundness and completeness proofs for both sentential and predicate logic. Prerequisite: PHIL 220 or consent of Department.
PHIL 422 Topics in Advanced Symbolic Logic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: PHIL 220 or consent of Department.
PHIL 426 Philosophy of Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected problems concerning the nature of language and meaning. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 428 Logic and Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Philosophical logic and its application to the semantics of natural language. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 433 Topics in Feminist Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: PHIL 272 or 332 (taken prior to 2006) or W ST 301 or consent of Department.
PHIL 436 Topics in Medieval Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200 level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 438 Topics in Indian Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200 level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 440 Topics in Ancient Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200 level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 442 17th- and 18th-Century Continental Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics concerning the early modern philosophical tradition of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 443 17th- and 18th-Century British Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics concerning the early modern British philosophical tradition of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 444 Kant Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 445 Topics in 19th-Century Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 446 Early Analytic Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200 level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 448 Topics in 20th-Century Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 450 Topics in Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 451 Topics in the History of Moral and Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 453 Philosophy of History Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of one or more of the following themes: Speculative accounts of our historical being and of the sense of history as a whole; critical analysis of the scope and limits of historiographic knowledge and explanation; historicist theses that philosophy is essentially historical. Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 470 Topics in Social and Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 480 Topics in Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 486 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PHIL 487 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PHIL 488 Current Research in Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 492 Topics in Phenomenology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
PHIL 493 Fourth-Year Honors Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Note: For students in the fourth year of the Honors program.
PHIL 498 Honors Essay Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Preparation of the honors essay, required in the fourth year of the Honors program.
Faculty of Arts Courses
PHIL 500 Metaphysics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 501 Epistemology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 505 Philosophy of Mind Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 510 Philosophy of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 522 Topics in Logic Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 526 Philosophy of Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 536 Topics in Medieval Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 540 Topics in Ancient Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 546 Topics in Modern Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 547 Topics in 20th Century Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 550 Moral Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 570 Social and Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 580 Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 594 Selected Problems in Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 596 Directed Reading I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Open only to graduate students beyond the qualifying year.
PHIL 597 Directed Reading II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Open only to graduate students beyond the qualifying year. Philosophy (from within the RC Tradition) St Joe’s
PHIL 209 The Human Person: Philosophical Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Personal identity, interpersonal relationships, sex and gender, freedom and immortality in historical and contemporary contexts.
PHIL 239 Greek Philosophy and the Christian Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues concerning human beings, knowledge, ethics and society among Greek thinkers and their impact on Christian thought. Note: Not available for credit with PHIL 139.
PHIL 249 Medieval Philosophy and the Christian Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of philosophy from the 5th to the 15th centuries; Philosophers from the Jewish, Islamic and Christian traditions.
PHIL 269 Moral Issues in a Christian Context Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis and evaluation of selected moral and social issues.
PHIL 279 Philosophy of Hunting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The moral, conceptual, existential, environmental, socio- political, and spiritual issues raised by the practice of hunting by humans.
PHIL 309 Augustine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *3 in PHIL or consent of the College.
PHIL 319 Thomas Aquinas Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *3 in PHIL or consent of the College.
PHIL 329 Natural Philosophy and the Christian Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A critical study of physical reality, dealing with such concepts as nature, scientific knowledge, space, time, causality, biological life, and teleology, in traditional and contemporary contexts.
PHIL 339 Contemporary World Views and Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical study of Christianity in dialogue with such worldviews as atheism, agnosticism, naturalism, materialism, existentialism, feminism, liberalism, postmodernism.
PHIL 359 Topics in Christian Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 379 Philosophy and Nursing I: Christian Perspectives Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 18 hours). Examining traditional applications of moral philosophy to issues in healthcare from a Christian perspective. Topics may include professionalism, confidentiality, nurse-patient relationships, and principled approaches to bioethics. Note: Open only to students registered in the BScN- Collaborative program. Not available for credit to students who have completed PHIL 388.
PHIL 389 Philosophy and Nursing II: Christian Perspectives Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 18 hours). Examining moral and social issues surrounding the goals of nursing and of healthcare from a Christian perspective, using traditional bioethics principles and complementary approaches (e.g. ethics of care, virtue ethics, etc.). Topics may include death and dying, allocation of scarce resources, issues in paediatric care, and global health issues. Note: Open only to students registered in the BScN-Collaborative program. Not available for credit to students who have completed PHIL 398.
PHIL 399 Religious Existentialism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHIL 459 Advanced Topics in Christian Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
Note: For Christian Theology courses offered by St Joseph’s College, see Christian Theology (CHRTC), St Joseph’s College (from within the Roman Catholic Tradition).
Graduate Courses
Note: Only a selection of the courses listed below are offered each year.
PHIL 592 Topics in Phenomenology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: At least *6 in PHIL, *3 of which must be at the 200-level, or consent of Department.
#
Physical Activity
PAC
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
It is the goal of PAC 100 level courses to provide the student with the opportunity to:
(1) acquire basic instructional skills and knowledge of basic strategies and tactics and techniques in the activity.
(2) develop an understanding of how concepts of general movement theory, physical literacy, Long Term Athlete Development and Canadian Sport for Life are applied in the activity.
(3) acquire activity specific knowledge of the terminology, history, sociocultural context, rules and organizational aspects for that activity in Canada.
(4) develop an appreciation for the process of learning and performing skills.
Notes
(1) Students enrolled in courses offered by the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation must take responsibility for ensuring that they are physically and medically fit to be taking such courses. If a student has a physical or medical condition that may compromise their participation in a course, it is the student’s responsibility to so inform the instructor of that course. Students may contact the Faculty for further information on physical activity requirements and are encouraged to seek medical advice if necessary.
(2) Students are expected to attend the first class of any activity course appropriately dressed for active participation.
(3) These courses may require the payment of additional miscellaneous fees. See Student Instructional Support Fees section of the calendar for details.
Undergraduate Courses
PAC 101 Principles and Concepts of Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An exploration of the principles and concepts that underlie the movement of individuals and groups in a variety of settings. As the focus of the course is on the development of conceptual understanding of movement, a wide range of activities and their contexts will be examined and experienced. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of PAC 101 or PEDS 294.
PAC 110 Instruction of the Basics of Aquatics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of aquatics. Prerequisite: Aquaquest Level 8, or RLSS Lifesaving II, or YMCA Level 3, or Red Cross Level Blue, or the ability to swim front and back crawl efficiently.
PAC 111 Instruction of the Basics of Basketball Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of basketball.
PAC 112 Instruction of the Basics of Field Hockey Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of field hockey.
PAC 113 Instruction of the Basics of Football Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of football.
PAC 114 Instruction of the Basics of Ice Hockey Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of ice hockey. Prerequisite: Average to above average skating ability. Note: Students must provide their own skates, sticks, hockey gloves, helmets, elbow pads and shin pads.
PAC 117 Instruction of the Basics of Rugby Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of rugby. Note: Mouth guards recommended.
PAC 118 Instruction of the Basics of Soccer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of soccer.
PAC 131 Instruction of the Basics of Badminton Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of badminton. Note: Students must provide their own racquets and shuttlecocks..
PAC 133 Instruction of the Basics of Squash Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of squash. Note: Students must provide their own racquets, balls, and eye guards.
PAC 135 Instruction of the Basics of Tennis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of tennis. Note: Students must provide their own racquets, balls, and nonmarking tennis shoes.
PAC 137 Instruction of the Basics of Volleyball Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of volleyball.
PAC 145 Instruction of the Basics of Golf Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of golf. Note 1: Students are responsible for the purchase of golf balls at the practice range. Note 2: Students can rent equipment from the local golf course.
PAC 154 Instruction of the Basics of Wrestling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of wrestling.
PAC 156 Instruction of the Basics of Yoga Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of yoga.
PAC 160 Instruction of the Basics of Gymnastics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of gymnastics.
PAC 173 Instruction of the Basics of Athletics (Track and Field) Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of sprinting, hurdling, cross country running, high jumping, long jumping, discus throwing, javelin throwing, and relays.
PAC 174 Instruction of the Basics of Athletics (Track and Field) Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of sprinting, hurdling, middle distance running, triple jumping, high jumping, pole vaulting, shot putting, hammer throwing, and relays.
PAC 182 Instruction of the Basics of Indoor Wall Climbing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of indoor wall climbing. Note: Equipment is available for rent from Urban Uprising.
PAC 183 Instruction of the Basics of Curling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in the instruction of the basics of curling.
PAC 197 Selected Topics in Physical Activity - Level I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Note: Topics may vary from year to year.
PAC 199 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skill in an individual or team activity. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty. Note: Topics may vary from year to year.
PAC 310 Coaching Aquatics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of aquatics. Prerequisite: PAC 110 or RLSS Bronze Medallion or the equivalent in swimming skill.
PAC 311 Coaching Basketball Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of basketball. Prerequisite: PAC 111.
PAC 313 Coaching Football Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of football. Prerequisite: PAC 113.
PAC 314 Coaching Ice Hockey Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of ice hockey. Students must provide their own equipment: skates, stick, helmet, hockey gloves, elbow pads and shin pads. Prerequisite: PAC 114.
PAC 318 Coaching Soccer Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of soccer. Prerequisite: PAC 118.
PAC 320 Structure and Strategy of Games Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). A study of similarities and differences in games (sports) through an examination of their specific rules, skills and strategies. Class members will be exposed to experiences at the practical and theoretical levels in the categories of territory, target, field and court games. Prerequisite: Successful completion of a minimum of *30.
PAC 325 The Study of Games for Children and Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). An in-depth look at the cognitive, affective and psychomotor development of children and youth as it applies to providing age and developmentally appropriate experiences in games. The focus is on the design, delivery and assessment of quality games for children and youth aged 4 to 15. This course is relevant to those going on to work with children and youth in educational, recreation, and coaching environments. Prerequisite: Successful completion of a minimum of *30.
PAC 333 Coaching Squash Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of squash. Note: Students must provide their own racquets, balls, and eye guards. Prerequisite: PAC 133.
PAC 335 Coaching Tennis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of tennis. Note: Students must provide their own racquets, balls, and non-marking tennis shoes. Prerequisite: PAC 135.
PAC 337 Coaching Volleyball Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of volleyball. Prerequisite: PAC 137.
PAC 345 Coaching Golf Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of golf. Note 1: Students are responsible for the purchase of golf balls at the practice range. Note 2: Students can rent equipment from the local golf course. Prerequisite: PAC 145.
PAC 354 Coaching Wrestling Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of wrestling. Prerequisite: PAC 154.
PAC 355 The Theory and Practice of Yoga Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Emphasis on philosophy, scientific basis and unique yoga approach to fitness and stress management along with practice of yoga asanas.
PAC 356 Yoga for Stress Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). The purpose of the course is to: a) develop an understanding of stress, its causes and its effects on the human body; b) to comprehend the principles of yoga practices and their application in managing stress; and c) to learn and practice specific yoga exercises for stress management.
PAC 360 Coaching Gymnastics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Acquisition of theoretical knowledge and personal skills used in coaching the advanced skills and strategies of gymnastics. Prerequisite: PAC 160.
PAC 365 The Study of Gymnastics for Children and Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-2s-0). A study of a variety of gymnastic programs from the perspective of their potential to meet the needs of children and youth at various ages. Class members will be required to plan, present, and evaluate gymnastic activities for children and youth. Prerequisite: Successful completion of a minimum of *60.
PAC 399 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theory, practice and teaching of the fundamental skills of an individual or team activity. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PAC 490 Applied Resistance Training Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-0-1.5). The scientific examination of resistance training as an applied training methodology for general conditioning and sport-specific enhancement. Emphasis on resistance training techniques, lifting mechanics, program design and implementation will be the core element. Supplementary topics include plyometric training, Olympic lifts, and selected population program modifications. Prerequisite: PEDS 335.
PAC 491 Applied Endurance Training Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An examination of the theoretical and practical aspects of both aerobic and anaerobic endurance training for general conditioning and sport. Topics include: the physiological limitations to endurance exercise; the assessment of endurance capacities; and the development and monitoring of endurance training programs. Prerequisite: PEDS 335.
#
Physical Education, Recreation and Leisure Studies
PERLS
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Undergraduate Courses
Note: Enrolment in all PERLS courses is restricted to students registered in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation, or students registered in specified programs that require PERLS courses to meet degree requirements. Other students must obtain approval of the Faculty.
PERLS 104 Introduction to Sociology of Sport and Leisure in Canadian Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). This course brings a sociological imagination to the study of sport and leisure with particular reference to Canadian society.
PERLS 105 Introduction to the Management of Sport, Physical Activity and Recreation Programs Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Provides students with an introduction to the management concepts required to successfully administer a sport, recreation or physical activity.
PERLS 204 Canadian History of Leisure, Sport, and Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory examination of Canadian leisure, sport, physical cultures, recreation, tourism, and health, in a global world, since the 19th century. Topics are integrated to understand the past in order to think broadly and critically through historical study of culture and society. Prerequisite: PERLS 104.
PERLS 207 Adapted Physical Activity and Leisure for Diverse Populations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to research, theory and practice pertaining to participation in physical activity and leisure by persons with impairments. The course explores the intersection of social influences and personal interests on participation in active lifestyles.
PERLS 304 Advanced Sociology of Sport and Leisure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Building on introductory sociological concepts from PERLS 104 and historical foundations from PERLS 204, the course focuses on developing a critical understanding of the power relations operating through contemporary social and cultural processes that shape the body, sport and leisure, such as colonialism, consumer culture, globalization and neo-liberalism. Prerequisites: PERLS 104 and 204.
PERLS 305 Financial Management in Recreation, Sport and Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines financial issues associated with the recreation, sport and tourism industries. Topics include industry trends and challenges, public partnerships, economic rationales for investment, sources of funding, revenues, and business development. Prerequisite PERLS 105.
PERLS 323 Aboriginal Peoples and Physical Practices: Canadian Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores ways in which physical practices influence the health of Aboriginal peoples. In this context health is defined as a state of balance involving body, emotions, mind, and spirit. The various forms of physical activity, sport, recreation, and leisure activities in which Aboriginal peoples participate will be examined. Prerequisite: PERLS 104 or NS 111
PERLS 335 Volunteers Management in Recreation, Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the specific role played by volunteer management in the delivery of recreation, sport and physical activity programs, including the structure and processes of the voluntary organizations that make up the recreation delivery system. Prerequisite: PERLS 105. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 335 or PERLS 335.
PERLS 350 Advanced Analysis of Sport and Leisure Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical consideration for the organization and administration of physical education, sport, recreation, and leisure programs. Prerequisite: PERLS 105.
PERLS 352 Leisure Facilities: Planning and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). An examination of the planning, management and operations of sport, leisure and recreation areas and facilities (inclusive of sport, recreation, and tourism). Note: Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Credit given for only one of PERLS 352 or 452. Prerequisite: PERLS 105.
PERLS 370 Assessment and Service Delivery for Adapted Physical Activity and Therapeutic Recreation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). An overview of basic qualitative and quantitative assessment principles and their use to deliver quality physical activity and recreation services for individuals with diverse needs. Prerequisites: PERLS 207 and KIN 109 or RLS 210 or STAT 141 or 151.
PERLS 371 Assessment and Evaluation in Physical Activity for Children and Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Provides an overview of basic assessment and evaluation principles and their application in the provision of physical activity for children and youth. Designed for individuals who are particularly interested in assessment of movement; this course will encourage critical thought about assessment and evaluation of the movement of children and youth. For the purpose of instruction and evaluation in instructional/coaching/leadership settings. Prerequisites: KIN 207 or PEDS 307 and PERLS 207, and successful completion of 30 course credits.
PERLS 411 The Business of Hockey Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores strategic, economic, and cultural issues related to the business of hockey - with a specific focus on the National Hockey League. Students will develop a critical understanding of the hockey industry and its stakeholders. Prerequisite: Students should be in the third or fourth year of their degree program.
PERLS 420 Play: The Foundation of Recreation, Sport and Physical Activity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will provide students with an in-depth understanding of the concept of play. It will offer learning experiences that will enable students to create play in various recreation, sport, tourism and physical activity contexts. Prerequisite: RLS 100 or HE ED 110
PERLS 421 Play Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The content will include the defining criteria and values of Play Leadership. The roles and responsibilities of Play Leaders in fostering learning and development through play will be examined.
PERLS 440 Play Around the World Program Preparation Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). The “Play Around the World” project provides a 3-month international or Canadian based, cross-cultural field placement working with children and youth of all abilities in the area of play, recreation and sport. Students apply and are selected in Fall Term, and then have a significant time commitment during the Winter Term to prepare for their Intersession field placement. Travel takes place May through August. This course represents the theoretical aspect of the experience, and involves written and creative work in the area of programming in cross-cultural settings. Prerequisite: PERLS 421 is strongly recommended. Corequisite: PERLS 441.
PERLS 441 Play Around the World - Field Placement Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, variable). The “Play Around the World” project provides a 3-month international or Canadian based, cross-cultural field placement working with children and youth of all abilities in the area of play, recreation and sport. Students apply and are selected in Fall Term, and then have a significant time commitment during the Winter Term to prepare for their Intersession field placement. Travel takes place May through August. This course represents the experiential part of the project. Prerequisite: PERLS 421 is strongly recommended. Corequisite: PERLS 440.
PERLS 451 Sport, Leisure and Social Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An advanced seminar course that engages select social and cultural theories to examine critically contemporary sport and leisure practices. Prerequisite: PERLS 304, or consent of the instructor. Students may not receive credit for both PERLS 351 and PERLS 451.
PERLS 495 Senior Research Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-3). This is an independent study course that allows students to explore a research topic under the supervision of a Doctoral student. Students will use the resources of libraries, laboratories, and current research projects with the goal of gaining an understanding of the process of conducting research. The student will be introduced to methodology and theory in a designated research area through reading, discussion, and practical application. Normally for students in their fourth year of study. Note: Students must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 over their last 30 credits. Prerequisite: PEDS 209 or 409 or RLS 210 and consent of the Associate Dean, (Undergraduate Programs). Students must arrange a topic with a Doctoral student.
PERLS 497 Selected Topics in Physical Education, Recreation and Leisure Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course offered on a topic of current interest in physical education and sport. Topics may vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
PERLS 499 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course designed to meet the needs of individual students. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
Graduate Courses
PERLS 504 The History of Nature, Parks, and Travel Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines history at the crossroads of nature, parks, and travel. It concerns the formation of ideas about nature expressed through leisure. Topics include: adventure, exploration, national parks, wildlife conservation, mountaineering, canoeing, wilderness art, recreation, youth movements, urban parks, holidays, cultural heritage, and tourism. Attention is given to the study of Canadian life in the 19th and 20th centuries, along with international tangents.
PERLS 506 Socio-cultural Perspectives on the Body and Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examines contemporary socio-cultural discussions and debates regarding the body as a social phenomenon, with a particular focus on understanding intersections of the body, physical activity, exercise and health. In doing so, questions regarding social construction, representation and regulation of bodies as well as experiences of embodiment will be examined.
PERLS 507 Sport and Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of the place of sport in contemporary Canadian popular culture, with three principal aims: 1) To offer an introduction to Cultural Studies and its key concepts; 2) To give students a chance to think about how social difference and inequality work in contemporary Canadian society, and how it is reflected in the world of sport and leisure; and 3) To examine the effects of both cultural and economic globalization on sport and Canadian society.
PERLS 541 Social Cognitive Approaches to Health Promoting Behaviors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course will address social-cognitive theories as they relate to behavioral change in the broad areas of health-promoting-behaviors (HPBS) with particular emphasis on physical activity. The theories and models to be covered will include Stages of Change, Social-Cognitive and Self-efficacy, Reasoned Action and Planned behavior, Self-esteem (various), etc. The specific context areas and order of classes will be determined in consultation with the class members each term. Areas of common interest will be identified and used as the basis for classes and examples throughout the term. The course is appropriate for individuals interested in social psychological and social-cognitive influences on health promoting behaviors and sport performance. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PERLS 550 Sport and Leisure Organizations and the Public Sector Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Emphasis is on the role of the federal, provincial and municipal governments in Canada in amateur sport and leisure including the interorganizational relations between the public sector and nonprofit/voluntary amateur sport and leisure organizations.
PERLS 563 Indigeneity and Settler Colonialism Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-0-0). This course will explore and critically examine the social issues to gain an understanding of the historical and contemporary relationship between Indigenous and settler societies. Specifically, this course endeavors to investigate how Canada’s brand of colonialism has impacted Indigenous collectivities both historically and today. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
PERLS 564 Managing Recreation, Sport, and Physical Activity Programs in Indigenous Communities Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-0-0). This course will examine the policies, politics, perceptions and practices related to managing recreation, sport and physical activity programs that occur in or engage indigenous communities. While a global context will be considered, the experience of Indigenous people in Canada will be central to this course. Attention will be given to applying different community and policy development theories to current issues and trends. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
PERLS 565 Indigenous Peoples’ Physical Activity Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-0-0). This course will examine the role of physical activity in the lives of Indigenous peoples. While global contexts will be considered, the experiences of Indigenous peoples in Canada will be the focus of the course. The manner in which colonization continues to shape the physical activity of Indigenous peoples will be examined and frameworks for the potential promotion of physical activity will be considered. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
PERLS 573 Coaching Issues and the Work Environment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A study of critical factors within the work environment of a high performance coach and strategies for effectiveness in complex and competitive work environments.
PERLS 575 Coaching Knowledge: The Social Dimensions of Performance Sport Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical examination of the construction of coaches’ knowledge and what makes coaches effective.
PERLS 580 Scientific Inquiry and Quantitative Research Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A study of basic philosophical issues, methodology and methods used by researchers in physical activity, sport, recreation and leisure. The emphasis of this course will be on quantitative inquiry. Prerequisite: PEDS 309 or consent of Faculty. Note: Students will not receive credit for PERLS 580 if credit was previously awarded for PEDS 580.
PERLS 581 Scientific Inquiry and Qualitative Research Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of philosophical issues and contemporary research methodologies in the fields of physical activity, sport, recreation, and leisure. The emphasis of this course will be on qualitative inquiry.
PERLS 582 Graduate Seminar: A Seminar in Current Factors, Problems and Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
PERLS 590 Research and Directed Studies I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
PERLS 591 Research and Directed Studies II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
PERLS 599 Directed Studies and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5s-0).
PERLS 685 Doctoral Research Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar focuses on the scholarly and professional challenges facing researchers in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation. This course is a requirement of the doctoral program in the Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation.
PERLS 690 Directed Studies and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
PERLS 691 Directed Studies and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
PERLS 699 Directed Studies and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5s-0).
PERLS 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). A significant piece of scholarly writing. This course used by course-based Master’s students.
#
Physical Therapy
PTHER
Department of Physical Therapy Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Note: All PTHER graduate level courses are open to Physical Therapy students only or by consent of the Department.
Undergraduate Courses
PTHER 350 Structural Human Anatomy =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An in-depth study of the gross anatomy of the upper and lower extremities, trunk, head and neck. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PTHER 351 Principles of Human Movement for Rehabilitation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An introduction to the analysis of human movement with an emphasis on kinetics, kinematics, normal gait analysis, motor control and balance. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PTHER 352 Introductory Statistics for the Health Care Professions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). An introduction to statistical principles, research methods and critical appraisal of research reports with a focus on the healthcare environment. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PTHER 401 Clinical Placement Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, 4 weeks). This 4 week full time clinical placement is offered in variable configuration dependent on individual IEPT needs. This clinical placement offers exposure to full-time clinical physical therapy practice and provides for integration and application of learning in academic studies. This course will be hands-on clinical practice, in approved, affiliated clinical facilities. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
PTHER 402 Clinical Placement Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, 4 weeks). This 4 week full-time clinical placement is offered on completion of academic courses. The placement will consolidate all program knowledge and skills in the practice environment leading to clinical competence in the Canadian practice setting. This course will be hands-on clinical practice, in approved, affiliated clinical facilities. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
PTHER 421 Professional Physical Therapy Practice in Canada II Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, 14 weeks). Continuing development of the knowledge, skills and judgment required to deliver safe and effective care in the context of Physical Therapy (PT) practice. Opportunities to build skills in clinical reasoning and communication (verbal and written) for effective collaborative practice will be provided through experiential learning formats. Essential entry-level PT assessment and treatment skills in musculoskeletal, neurological and cardiorespiratory areas of practice will be included. Structured clinical experiences for application and integration of prior and new knowledge and skills will be included. Blended format of in-class and online learning. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
PTHER 430 Professional Physical Therapy Practice in Canada III Œ1 (fi 2) (variable, 14 weeks). Skills required for a primary care practitioner in interpretation and application of assessment findings to determine physical therapy (PT) diagnosis and treatment plans will be consolidated through the application of clinical decision making model(s), critical thinking, evidence-based practice and utilization of the International Classification of Function. Multiple areas of practice will be covered including multisystem, musculoskeletal, neurological and cardiorespiratory. Blended format of in-class and online learning. Prerequisite: Consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
PTHER 500 Movement Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2 in 14 weeks). Introduction to mechanical and analytical concepts pertinent to physical therapy. Content will include the systematic analysis of posture, balance, typical and atypical gait, functional movements and the influence of person, task, and environment on task performance. Prerequisite: PTHER 516.
PTHER 504 Clinical Therapeutic Exercise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2 in 15 weeks). This course examines the acute and chronic physiological responses to exercise and explores the use of exercise in the management of chronic diseases and disabilities. Prerequisite: PTHER 516.
PTHER 511 Introduction to Clinical Education Œ0.5 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, 10 hours). Credit. Seminars on the theory and practice of experiential learning will prepare students for clinical placements with diverse populations. Emphasis will be placed on professionalism and supervision and evaluation methods.
PTHER 516 Anatomy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-3). Anatomy of the upper limb, lower limb and trunk. Specific emphasis on knowledge of joints, ligaments, nerve supply and deep muscles.
PTHER 517 Clinical Placement I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (two term, 55 hours). An introduction to clinical practice including coursework, clinical visits and a one week placement in approved clinical affiliations.
PTHER 518 Clinical Placement II Œ1-6 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, 6 weeks). Credit. Clinical practice in approved clinical affiliations.
PTHER 520 Clinical Placement III Œ1-6 (variable) (either term, 6 weeks). Credit. Clinical practice in approved clinical affiliations. Can be combined with INT D 411 for an interdisciplinary placement for a combined weighting.
PTHER 521 Clinical Placement IV Œ1-6 (variable) (either term, 6 weeks). Credit. Clinical practice in approved clinical affiliations. Can be combined with INT D 411 for an interdisciplinary placement for a combined weighting.
PTHER 522 Clinical Placement V Œ1-6 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, 6 weeks). Credit. Clinical practice in approved clinical affiliations. Can be combined with INT D 411 for an interdisciplinary placement for a combined weighting.
PTHER 523 Clinical Placement VI Œ1-6 (variable) (either term or Spring/Summer, 6 weeks). Credit. Clinical practice in approved clinical affiliations. Can be combined with INT D 411 for an interdisciplinary placement for a combined weighting.
PTHER 524 Professional Issues I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4s-0 in 15 weeks). Introduction to physical therapy including theory and concepts of rehabilitation science. Content will include communication, professional ethics and conduct, disability issues, models of disablement, client centered principles and self reflection. A model of practice and clinical decision making will be presented.
PTHER 525 Professional Issues II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-4S-0 in 6 weeks). Continuation of the study of professional issues relevant to the practice of physical therapy in Canada and globally. Topics include cultural issues, disability ethics and an introduction to Health Promotion. Prerequisite: PTHER 524.
PTHER 526 Professional Issues III Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 1.5-1.5s-0 in 10 weeks). The study of professional roles, responsibilities and essential competencies within public and private practice with an emphasis on professional communication, assignment of care to physical therapy assistants, patient and colleague education, patient safety, organizational structures, health policy and administration. Prerequisite: PTHER 525.
PTHER 527 Professional Issues IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-2s-0 in 6 weeks). The study of professional regulatory responsibilities and medical-legal topics including registration, continuing competence, conduct and discipline, professional standards of practice, medical-legal considerations and the litigation process. Fundamentals of business practice, funding structures, and business ethics will be examined in the context of professional practice. Prerequisite: PTHER 526.
PTHER 528 Foundations of Physical Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-3 in 15 weeks). Introduction to the theory and application of physical therapy skills with an emphasis on assessment and handling techniques. Functional application of anatomy knowledge will be emphasized. Prerequisite: PTHER 516.
PTHER 538 Musculoskeletal I Œ4 (fi 8) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1-2S-6 in 15 weeks). The assessment and treatment of musculoskeletal-related conditions. Components of practice will include; musculoskeletal pathology, assessment principles, clinical decision making, therapeutic exercise, mobilization techniques, and outcome evaluation. Prerequisites: PTHER 504, 528, and 577.
PTHER 540 Practicum Œ0 (fi 3) (either term, unassigned). A practicum in the student’s area of concentration and interest to be taken by the student if their committee feels the student needs, or the student desires, further practical experience. This course may involve experience off campus in any geographical area where the student may gain the necessary experience.
PTHER 544 Cardiorespiratory Œ2.5 (fi 5) (either term, 2-0-2 in 15 weeks). The study of acute cardiorespiratory pathology. Components of practice will include: an understanding of pathology, assessment, intervention, outcome evaluation, relevant therapeutic exercise, electrophysical agents and evidence-based skills. Prerequisites: PTHER 528 and 577.
PTHER 546 Adult Neurology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2.5-1.5S-2 in 15 weeks). Introduction to the theory and application of physical therapy in adults with neurological conditions. Components of practice will include assessment, intervention, outcome evaluation, therapeutic exercise, electrophysical agents, and evidence-based skills. Corequisite: PTHER 567. Prerequisites: PTHER 500, 504, and 528.
PTHER 548 Physical Therapy and Chronic Disease Management Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4-1S-4 in 10 weeks). Study of the theory and application of physical therapy in clients with selected chronic diseases. Components of practice will include assessment, intervention, outcome evaluation, therapeutic exercise, electrophysical agents, and evidence-based skills. Prerequisites: PTHER 538, 544, 546, 563, and 565.
PTHER 549 Musculoskeletal II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-2S-3 in 10 weeks). The use of mobilization, stabilization, and manipulation techniques in selected peripheral and spinal dysfunction. Components of practice will include assessment, intervention, outcome evaluation, therapeutic exercise, electrophysical agents, and evidence-based skills. Prerequisite: PTHER 538.
PTHER 554 Elective Œ1-3 (variable) (variable, unassigned). Students can register in these for credit towards the MScPT requirement of 3 credits in elective coursework. A variety of topic areas may be offered. Note: Course title is variable; course may be repeated.
PTHER 555 Therapeutic Physical Agents Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 1.5-0-1.5 in 15 weeks). Introduction to the theory, evidence, and application of therapeutic physical agents in physical therapy. Prerequisite: PTHER 528.
PTHER 563 Gross Motor Development and Pediatric Physical Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1.5s-1.5 in 15 weeks). Introduction to theories of motor development and a systematic observational approach to the assessment of gross motor skills in infancy and childhood. Introduction to issues in pediatric physical therapy, assessment and intervention approaches, appropriate outcome measures, service delivery models, and important research findings. Corequisite: PTHER 546 and 567. Prerequisites: PTHER 544.
PTHER 565 Aging and Physical Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1.5-1S-1.5 in 15 weeks). An examination of age-related changes, prevalent age-related conditions treated by physical therapists and contextual factors that influence the activity and participation of older adults. Prerequisites: PTHER 538 and 544. Corequisite: PTHER 546.
PTHER 566 Introduction to Neuroanatomy Œ1 (fi 2) (either term or Spring/Summer, 12 hours in 6 weeks). Anatomy of the brain and central nervous system and an introduction to the functions of the human nervous system. Prerequisite: PTHER 516.
PTHER 567 Neuroscience for Rehabilitation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0 in 15 weeks). Structures and functions of the human nervous system. Emphasis is on the effects of injury, diseases and rehabilitation training on the nervous system. Prerequisites: PTHER 516.
PTHER 572 Basic Concepts in Evidence-Based Practice Œ2 (fi 4) (either term or Spring/Summer, 1.5-1.5s-0 in 15 weeks). Introduction to basic concepts of evidence-based practice with emphasis on the search, selection, evaluation, and application of scientific evidence to inform clinical decision-making in physical therapy. Students will consider issues of measurement and outcome assessment.
PTHER 573 Applied Concepts in Evidence-Based Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 2-4S-0 in 6 weeks). Identification and evaluation of best evidence for a client observed during clinical placement. Critical appraisal methodologies such as single subject design, critically appraised topics, systematic review and clinical practice guidelines will be introduced and applied to the clinical context. Prerequisite: PTHER 572.
PTHER 574 Advanced Concepts in Evidence-Based Practice Œ2 (fi 4) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3s-0 in 10 weeks). Advanced concepts in measurement of clinical effectiveness such as program evaluation, quality improvement initiatives, and evaluation of synthesized sources. Prerequisites: PTHER 573.
PTHER 575 Clinical Placement Preparation Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). Course work and/or a practical examination assigned on an individual basis. This course will focus on the knowledge and practical skills necessary for safe practice within a clinical placement. Prerequisite: departmental consent.
PTHER 577 Foundations of Primary Care Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-2 in 15 weeks). Introduction to Primary Care and the role of the physical therapist in this practice setting. This course will provide foundational knowledge of the pathophysiology and presentation of common medical conditions, history-taking and medical screening, pharmacology and commonly used medications, diagnostic imaging, laboratory tests and clinical reasoning models. Prerequisite: PTHER 516.
PTHER 578 Advanced Clinical Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-1s-3 in 6 weeks). Study of the theory, evidence and application of physical therapy in complex conditions and advanced topics in primary care, disability management, and occupational rehabilitation. This course will build on the content of PTHER 577 and will focus on clinical reasoning in more complex conditions and cases. Prerequisite: PTHER 546, 548, 549, and 565.
PTHER 900 Evidence Based Practice Capping Assessment Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, unassigned). Credit. This capping exercise is composed of a group written evaluative project with an individual oral examination. Prerequisite: Consult Department.
PTHER 901 Evidence Based Practice Clinical Capping Assessment Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, unassigned). Credit. This capping exercise is composed of a practical examination of clinical skills. Prerequisite: Consult Department.
#
Physics
PHYS
Department of Physics Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 124, 144 or EN PH 131 or SCI 100.
(2) Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 126, 130,146 or SCI 100.
(3) Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 230 or 281.
(4) Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 208 or 271.
(5) Also see Astronomy (ASTRO) and Geophysics (GEOPH) and Mathematical Physics (MA PH) listings for other courses offered by the Department of Physics.
(6) PHYS 301, 308, and 364 are offered alternate years only. Please consult the Department for course scheduling.
(7) If a student plans to proceed from PHYS 124 to PHYS 146, it is strongly recommended that the student achieve a minimum grade of B- in PHYS 124.
Undergraduate Courses
PHYS 114 Physics: The Big Picture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A qualitative and mostly non-mathematical course in which the overall structure and main concepts of physics are examined. Classical versus quantum worlds; order versus chaos; Newton’s versus Einstein’s universe; selected topics and issues in modern physics. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1. Note: This course does not qualify as an equivalent to high school Physics 30. This course also does not qualify as a prerequisite for 200 or higher level ASTRO, GEOPH, MA PH, or PHYS courses. Not accepted as part of the Physics requirements for Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry applications.
PHYS 124 Particles and Waves =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Algebra-based course primarily for students in life, environmental, and medical sciences. It guides the student through two distinct types of motion: motion of matter (particles) and wave motion. Vectors, forces, bodies in equilibrium, review of kinematics and basic dynamics; conservation of momentum and energy; circular motion; vibrations; elastic waves in matter; sound; wave optics; black body radiation, photons, de Broglie waves. Examples relevant in environmental, life, and medical sciences will be emphasized. Prerequisites: Physics 20 or equivalent, Mathematics 30-1. Physics 30 is strongly recommended. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of PHYS 124, 144, EN PH 131 or SCI 100. Note: To proceed to PHYS 146 after taking PHYS 124, it is strongly recommended that a minimum grade of B- be achieved in PHYS 124.
PHYS 126 Fluids, Fields, and Radiation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A continuation of PHYS 124 primarily for students in life, environmental, and medical science. Fluid statics and dynamics, gases, kinetic interpretation; electrostatics; currents and circuits; magnetic field; electromagnetic induction; nuclear radiation, its interaction with matter and applications. Prerequisite: PHYS 124 or PHYS 144. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of PHYS 126, 130, 146 or SCI 100.
PHYS 130 Wave Motion, Optics, and Sound Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Geometrical optics, optical instruments, oscillations, waves, sound, interference, diffraction. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1, Mathematics 31, Physics 30. Corequisite: MATH 100 or 113 or 114 or 117 or 134 or 144 or equivalent. Restricted to Engineering students. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0.
PHYS 144 Newtonian Mechanics and Relativity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A calculus-based course for students majoring in the physical sciences. Newtonian mechanics, including kinematics, dynamics, conservation of momentum and energy, rotational motion and angular momentum; special relativistic kinematics and dynamics, including length contraction, time dilation, and the conservation of energy and momentum in special relativity. Prerequisites: Mathematics 30-1 and Physics 30. Mathematics 31 is strongly recommended. Corequisites: MATH 117 or 144. Note: MATH 113 or 114 is not acceptable as a co-requisite but may be used as a pre-requisite in place of MATH 117 or 144. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of PHYS 124, 144, EN PH 131 or SCI 100.
PHYS 146 Fluids and Waves =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). A calculus-based course for students majoring in the physical sciences. Fluid statics and dynamics, elasticity and simple harmonic motion; sound waves, wave properties of light; quantum waves, wave-particle duality. Prerequisite: PHYS 124 (see Note following) or 144. Corequisite: MATH 118 or 146. Note: MATH 115 is not acceptable as a co-requisite but may be used as a pre-requisite in place of MATH 118 or 146. Note: Credit may be obtained for only one of PHYS 126, 130, 146 or SCI 100. Note: To proceed to PHYS 146 after taking PHYS 124, it is strongly recommended that a minimum grade of B- be achieved in PHYS 124.
PHYS 208 Aspects of Modern Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Experimental evidence for limitations of classical physics; Einstein’s special theory of relativity; length contraction; time dilation; twin paradox; equivalence of mass and energy; relativistic mass and momentum; the photo-electric effect, the Compton effect, X-ray production and electron diffraction; a discussion of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and the Schrodinger equation including applications of one dimensional potential wells and barriers; tunnelling; the simple harmonic oscillator; atomic physics; hydrogen atom; periodic table. Prerequisites: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130; MATH 113 or 114 or 144. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYS 208 or 271.
PHYS 230 Electricity and Magnetism Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Electric fields, Gauss’ Law; electric potential; capacitance and dielectrics; electric current and resistance; magnetic fields, Ampere’s Law; Faraday’s Law; inductance; magnetic properties of matter. Prerequisites: PHYS 130 or 146, and MATH 100 or 113 or 114 or 117. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 101 or 115 or 118. For Science students only: SCI 100 may be used in lieu of PHYS 146, MATH 114 and 115. Note: Restricted to Engineering students. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0. Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 230 or 281.
PHYS 234 Introductory Computational Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Algorithms for scientific data analysis: sorting methods, polynomial fitting, regression, interpolation, and Fourier analysis: techniques for solving physics and geophysics problems with selected topics from mechanics, waves, geometrical optics and ray tracing, electricity and magnetism, statistical physics, decay processes, quantum physics, signal processing. Prerequisites: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130; and MATH 100 or 113 or 114 or 117 or 144, and MATH 102 or 125 or 127. CMPUT 174 is recommended for students without prior programming experience.
PHYS 244 Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Particle dynamics; oscillating systems and normal modes; conservative forces and energy; introduction to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics; central forces; orbital motion and scattering. Prerequisite: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Corequisite: MATH 120 or 125 or 127 or 102 or equivalent, and MATH 209 or 215 or 317 or equivalent.
PHYS 261 Physics of Energy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Energy in its various forms; conservation of energy; basic thermodynamics of ideal gases and phase changes; heat engines and refrigerators; consumption of energy resources; space heating and heat transfer; radioactivity; nuclear fission and nuclear power; alternative and renewable energy resources. Prerequisites: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130; and MATH 113 or 114 or 144.
PHYS 271 Introduction to Modern Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Experimental evidence for limitations of classical physics; review of special relativity: quantization of charge, light, and energy; blackbody radiation, photoelectric effect, Compton effect; models of the atom; wavelike properties of particles; the uncertainty principle, the Schrodinger Equation, the infinite and finite square well, the harmonic oscillator, tunneling; the hydrogen atom, orbital angular momentum and electron spin; spin and statistics; selected topics. Prerequisite: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Pre- or Corequisite: MATH 209 or 215 or 317 or equivalent. Note: Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYS 208 or 271.
PHYS 281 Electricity and Magnetism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Electric fields; Gauss’ law; electric potential; capacitance and dielectrics; electric current and resistance; DC circuits; magnetic fields; Ampere’s Law; Faraday’s Law; inductance; magnetic properties of matter, AC circuits; Maxwell’s equations; electromagnetic waves. Prerequisite: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Corequisite: MATH 209 or 214 or 217 or equivalent. Credit may normally be obtained for only one of PHYS 230 or 281.
PHYS 292 Physics Laboratory A Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-3). Experiments in mechanics, electromagnetism and atomic physics. Corequisites: PHYS 281 or 230, and MATH 209 or 214 or equivalent. Note: Restricted to Engineering students.
PHYS 294 General Physics Laboratory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Introduction to methods of experimental physics with examples from modern physics. Prerequisite: MATH 100 or 113 or 114 or 117 or 144, and one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Note: Not to be taken by Specialization or Honors students in Physics, Geophysics or Mathematical Physics. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYS 294 or 295.
PHYS 295 Experimental and Statistical Methods of Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Detection of radioactive emissions using a Geiger counter, determination of the absolute zero of temperature using a gas thermometer, and other experiments illustrating the analysis of experimental data. Prerequisites: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130, and MATH 101 or 115 or 118 or 146. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYS 294 or 295.
PHYS 297 Classic Experiments in Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Choice of modern physics experiments including speed of light, measurement of e/m, Balmer series in hydrogen, photoelectric effect, and the Millikan oil drop and Franck-Hertz experiments. Prerequisite: PHYS 294 or 295. Corequisites: PHYS 208 or 271. Pre or corequisites: PHYS 230 or 281, and MATH 101 or 115 or 118 or 146 or SCI 100.
PHYS 301 Particles, Nuclei, and the Cosmos Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Relativity; properties and structure of the nucleus; radioactivity, carbon dating, tracer techniques; nuclear fission; fusion; nuclear reactors; elementary particles and particle accelerators; standard model; astrophysics; cosmology. Prerequisite: PHYS 208 or 271; MATH 101 or 115 or 118 or 146 or SCI 100. Note: This course is not available for credit toward Honors Physics and Mathematical Physics degree programs. Offered alternate years only. Consult Department for course scheduling.
PHYS 308 Statistical, Molecular, and Solid State Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classical and quantum statistics; fermions; bosons; molecular structure and spectra; molecular bonding; vibrational and rotational states; absorption; stimulated emission; population inversion; lasers; solid state physics; crystal structure; free-electron gas in metals; band theory of solids; semiconductors; semiconductor devices; superconductivity. Prerequisites: PHYS 208 or 271; MATH 101 or 115 or 118 or 146 or SCI 100. Note: Not available for credit towards Honours Physics and Mathematical Physics degree programs. Offered alternate years only. Consult Department for course scheduling.
PHYS 310 Thermodynamics and Kinetic Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Temperature: heat, work, and the first law of thermodynamics; entropy and the second law, enthalpy, Helmholtz and Gibbs free energy; thermodynamic equilibrium criteria; Maxwell’s relations, phase transitions; elementary kinetic theory of gases. Prerequisites: one of PHYS 124, PHYS 144, or EN PH 131, and one of PHYS 126, PHYS 146, or PHYS 130. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 209 or 215 or 317 or equivalent.
PHYS 311 Statistical Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Quantum states, probability distributions, temperature and entropy; canonical ensemble and the partition function; ideal gases, paramagnets; blackbody radiation. Debye model for phonons; quantum statistics; Fermi-Dirac distribution and electrons in metals; Bose-Einstein distribution. Prerequisites: PHYS 310 (or CH E 243 for Engineering Physics Program students), PHYS 271 and MATH 209 or 215 or 317 or equivalent.
PHYS 362 Optics and Lasers =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Gaussian optics; optical instruments; matrix analysis of lens systems; aberrations; polarization; double- and multiple-beam interference; Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction; introduction to laser physics and applications; selected topics from contemporary optics. Prerequisite: PHYS 230 or 281, and MATH 209 or 215 or 317.
PHYS 364 Environmental Physics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Calculation of pollutant concentrations using principles of materials balance; vertical variation of pressure and temperature in the atmosphere; atmospheric stability and the dispersal of air pollutants; water vapour and humidity; blackbody radiation and Earth’s global energy balance; molecular absorption of electromagnetic radiation; the ozone problem; the radon problem. Prerequisites: PHYS 261, and MATH 101 or 115 or 118 or 146 or SCI 100. Offered alternate years only. Consult Department for course scheduling.
PHYS 372 Quantum Mechanics A =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Origins of quantum mechanics; wave functions; Schrodinger equation and its application to one dimensional systems, postulates and physical interpretation of quantum mechanics; orbital angular momentum, central potentials and three-dimensional systems. Prerequisites: PHYS 271, PHYS 230 or 281, MATH 225 or 227 (or 102), MATH 334 or 201.
PHYS 381 Electromagnetic Theory I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of scalar and vector fields; Gauss and Stokes theorems; curvilinear coordinates; Dirac delta function; electrostatic field and potential; electrostatic energy; conductors, capacitors; Laplace’s equation; boundary value problems; methods of images; multipoles; electrostatic field in matter; polarization; displacement; linear dielectrics; magnetostatic field; Biot-Savart and Ampere’s law; vector potential; magnetostatic field in matter; magnetization; linear and nonlinear magnetic media. Prerequisites: PHYS 230 or 281. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 334 or 201 or equivalent
PHYS 397 Projects in Experimental Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Projects in optics, electricity, magnetism, and modern physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 292 or 295 or 297, and PHYS 381. Corequisite MATH 337 or ECE 341 or equivalent.
PHYS 415 Introduction to Condensed Matter Physics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lattice structure and binding; lattice vibrations; electrons in solids, band structure of metals, Fermi surface; semiconductors and junctions; paramagnetism and diamagnetism; introduction to lattice defects. Prerequisites: PHYS 311 and 372, and MATH 337 or ECE 341 or equivalent.
PHYS 420 Computational Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Basic principles; computational methods selected from finite-differences, matrix manipulation, variational techniques, discrete transforms, stochastic methods, lattice techniques; as applied to topics selected from nonlinear mechanics, chaotic systems; electrodynamics; wave propagation; statistical physics; quantum mechanics; condensed matter. Prerequisites: PHYS 234, 244, PHYS 381, MATH 337 or ECE 341 or equivalent. Recommended pre- or corequisites: MA PH 343, PHYS 311, PHYS 372, PHYS 472, and PHYS 481. Familiarity with a programming language strongly recommended.
PHYS 458 Special and General Relativity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Relativity: space-time; Lorentz transformations; definitions of scalars, vectors and tensors; motion of a relativistic particle; energymomentum tensor and equations of motion; transformation of electromagnetic fields. General Relativity: geometry of curved space-time; equivalence principle; gravity as curvature; Einstein equations; black hole and cosmological solutions; gravitational waves. Prerequisites: MATH 337 or ECE 341, PHYS 244. Corequisite: PHYS 481.
PHYS 467 Fundamentals of Continuum Mechanics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Cartesian tensors; stress; strain and deformation; Eulerian and Lagrangian descriptions of motions; conservation principles, Cauchy’s equation of motion; constitutive relations, elasticity, plasticity, linear and nonlinear viscous fluid flow; elastic wave equation and Navier-Stokes equation; similarity, scaling and nondimensionalisation of governing equations. Applications from geophysics, materials science, oceanography, and atmospheric physics. Pre- or corequisites: MATH 337 or ECE 341, PHYS 381.
PHYS 472 Quantum Mechanics B =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of the postulates of quantum mechanics; quantization of angular momentum; matrix representations, spin and parity; approximation methods; perturbation theory; variational and other methods; applications; scattering theory; systems of identical particles. Prerequisites: PHYS 372, and MATH 337 or ECE 341 or equivalent, and MATH 311 or 411.
PHYS 481 Electromagnetic Theory II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Electromotive force; Faraday’s law; inductance; Maxwell’s equations in free space and in matter; electromagnetic potentials; gauges; energy and momentum conservation laws; plane waves in vacuum, in nonconducting and in conducting media; reflection and refraction of electromagnetic waves; dispersion, wave guides; dipole radiation; radiation due to moving charge; radiation reaction. Prerequisite: PHYS 381, MATH 337 or ECE 341 or equivalent.
PHYS 485 Introductory Particle Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Particles and forces; relativistic kinematics; symmetries and conservation laws; bound states, heavy flavours, and the quark model; Dirac equation and the electrodynamics of leptons; electrodynamics of quarks and the parton model; quantum chromodynamics and the strong interactions; weak interactions and electroweak unification. Prerequisites: PHYS 372; MATH 225 or 227, MATH 337 or equivalent. Recommended: PHYS 458 and PHYS 472.
PHYS 495 Special Topics in Physics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course covers specialized topics of interest to advanced undergraduate students. Consult the Department for details about current offerings. Prerequisites depend on the subject. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
PHYS 499 Special Projects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Experimental or reading project under the direction of a staff member. Prerequisites: A 300-level Physics course and consent of Department. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
Graduate Courses
Note: The following undergraduate courses may be taken for credit by graduate students: ASTRO 429, 430, 465; PHYS 415, 420, 472, 481, 485, 499.
PHYS 511 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles of quantum mechanics; central force problems; angular momentum; approximation methods for stationary states; time- dependent perturbation theory; scattering theory; identical particles and second quantization; quantum statistical mechanics.
PHYS 512 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Time-dependent scattering theory; relativistic quantum mechanics; Klein-Gordon and Dirac equations; introduction to quantum field theory.
PHYS 524 Classical Electrodynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Wave guides, radiating systems; special relativity, dynamics of relativistic particles and electromagnetic fields; radiation by moving charges; multiple fields. Additional special topics will be discussed.
PHYS 530 Statistical Mechanics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Fundamentals of classical and quantum statistical mechanics, with selected applications.
PHYS 541 Condensed Matter Physics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Crystal structure and symmetries; electrons and band structure; semiconductors and heterostructures; lattice vibrations and thermal properties.
PHYS 543 Condensed Matter Physics II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Dielectric and optical properties of solids; magnetism; electronic transport; disordered systems; electron-phonon interaction and superconductivity; strongly correlated electronic systems.
PHYS 574 Experimental Methods in Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3/2). Statistics and data analysis: S/N considerations; interactions of photons, neutrons, and charged particles with matter; detectors; vacuum technology. Other topics to be selected according to students’ needs and instructor’s preference.
PHYS 580 Computational Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Basic principles; computational methods selected from finite-differences, matrix manipulation, variational techniques, discrete transforms, stochastic methods, lattice techniques; as applied to topics selected from nonlinear mechanics, chaotic systems; electrodynamics; wave propagation; statistical physics; quantum mechanics; condensed matter. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
PHYS 595 Special Topics in Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course covers specialized topics of interest to junior graduate students. Consult the Department for details about current offerings. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
PHYS 610 Quantum Field Theory I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHYS 635 Statistical Theory of Plasmas Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHYS 696 Black Hole Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
PHYS 699 Special Topics in Theoretical Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Physiology
PHYSL
Department of Physiology
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Note: Details on the BSc Program in Physiology can be found in the Faculty of Science section.
Undergraduate Courses
PHYSL 208 Human Physiology Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Introductory course in human physiology. PHYSL 208 is the online equivalent to current lecture course PHYSL 210. Students will understand the function and regulation of the human body and the complexities of cells, tissues, major organs and systems. Prerequisites: BIOL 107; plus 6 credits in University level Chemistry. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYSL 208, 210, or 212 and 214. See PHYSL 210 or 212 and 214.
PHYSL 210 Human Physiology =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Introductory course in human physiology. Students will study the function and regulation of the human body and the complexities and interactions of cells, tissues, major organs and systems. This course is offered as a classroom-based course or in an online format. Students may not transfer from one mode of instruction to the other. Prerequisites: BIOL 107; plus 6 credits in University level Chemistry. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYSL 210 or 212 and 214. See PHYSL 212 and 214.
PHYSL 212 Human Physiology I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to human physiology. Part 1, covering: membrane transport mechanisms; intracellular and electrical signaling; the physiology of excitable tissues; the physiology of blood; and the cardiovascular system. Required for students in the Physiology Honors program. Recommended for students in other Honors/Specialization programs. Prerequisites: BIOL 107; CHEM 101 and 102. Pre- or corequisites: CHEM 164 or 261, and 263. Credit may be obtained in only one of PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210. Students with credit in PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 may not obtain credit in ZOOL 241 or 242. Students in some Honors/Specialization programs may require PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210. See your departmental advisor.
PHYSL 214 Human Physiology II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An introduction to human physiology. Part 2, covering: the physiology of the gastrointestinal tract; the respiratory system; the renal system; endocrinology; and the reproductive system. Required for students in the Physiology Honors program. Recommended for students in other Honors/ Specialization programs. Prerequisite: PHYSL 212.
PHYSL 310 Experimental Techniques in Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 1-0-6). Modern techniques in Physiology (involving cell biology, molecular, histological and live cell imaging, and non-invasive experimentation) will be discussed in theory and demonstrated/utilized in a series of laboratory experiments. Student participation as subjects may be required in some labs. Prerequisites: Successful completion of PHYSL 210 or PHYSL 212 and 214 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 372 Systems Neuroscience =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the organization and function of vertebrate nervous systems. Major topics will be neural development, control of movement, integration of sensory information, and the neuronal mechanisms underlying memory and learning. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210, or ZOOL 242.
PHYSL 400 Reproductive Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to describe (i) the causes of infertility, (ii) therapeutic approaches to restore or enhance fertility and (iii) contraceptive approaches to avoid pregnancy. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 403 Neuroendoimmunomodulation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The physiological and pathophysiological interrelationships between the nervous, endocrine and immune systems. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 404 Cardiovascular Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). General concepts in human cardiovascular physiology: properties of the myocardium, heart function, vascular biology, hemodynamics and control of cardiovascular system. Discussion of cardiovascular pathologies and relevant clinical situations. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 405 Sensory Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The sensory systems in human physiology. The topics covered will be vision, hearing, vestibular mechanisms, taste, smell and touch, including receptor mechanisms and central organization. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 407 Molecular and Cellular Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The molecular and cellular aspects of physiological processes. Main areas include the structure and functions of plasma membranes (emphasizing transport processes, their regulation and methods of study) and the mechanism of action of hormones (hormonereceptor interactions, receptor regulation and interactions of intracellular mediators). The physiological significance of these processes will be stressed throughout. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 409 Homeostatic Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Advanced principles of regulatory mechanisms in human and mammalian physiology, with in depth analysis of interrelationships between different organ systems in the maintenance of homeostasis. Clinical and physiologic perspectives are highlighted in the demonstration of how organ systems interact in health and the disruption in homeostasis which occurs in disease. Contemporary topics in energy and cardiovascular homeostasis such as the physiological adaptations to pregnancy, exercise, obesity and diabetes will be explored using an integrative, systems physiology approach. Suitable as preparation for careers in medicine, biomedical research and health-related fields. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214 (or 210), 404 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 444 Current Topics in Neuroscience =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture course emphasizing contemporary aspects of developmental, cellular, systems and cognitive neurophysiology. Topics will include experience-dependent processes in the development of the nervous system, the molecular and cellular mechanisms for learning and memory, the electrophysiology of rhythmic activity in identified brain circuits, the microphysiology of transmitter secretion, and the representation and transformation of information in the nervous system. Students will be expected to demonstrate a thorough understanding of selected readings from current and classical literature. Suitable for honors students in Physiology, Pharmacology, Psychology and Neuroscience. Prerequisites: PMCOL 371 or ZOOL 342, and PHYSL 372 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 461 Undergraduate Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Individual study, open to undergraduate students who have identified a supervisor in the Department of Physiology. Co-supervisors from other Departments are permitted. Students will spend one term in the laboratory of a faculty member and carry out a laboratory research project. Registration package and further information are available. Prerequisites: PHYSL 210 or PHYSL 212/214 and consent from the course coordinator.
PHYSL 466 Undergraduate Tutorial =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual study. Restricted to students in the Physiology Honors Program. Students will select a faculty member who will guide them through a course of reading at an advanced level on a specialized topic. Successful completion of an oral presentation is required at the conclusion of the project. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
PHYSL 467 Undergraduate Research Project =OPEN-LIMITED Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Individual study, open to undergraduate students who have identified a supervisor in the department of Physiology. Co-supervision with Professors from other Departments is possible, provided that a supervisor from the department of Physiology is identified. Students will spend two terms in the laboratory of a faculty member and carry out a laboratory research project. Prerequisites: PHYSL 210 or PHYSL 212/214 and consent from the course coordinator.
PHYSL 468 Undergraduate Research Thesis I =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-0-12). Individual study, open to undergraduate students who have identified a supervisor in the Department of Physiology. Taken in conjunction with PHYSL 469, this 6-credit course is the first part of a 12-credit program in two terms resulting in an honours research thesis in physiology. Students will spend the Fall term in the laboratory of a supervisor and carry out a research project to be continued in the second term as PHYSL 469. Co- supervision with Professors from other Departments is possible, provided that a supervisor from the Department of Physiology is identified. Students will be evaluated on an oral presentation, a written research proposal and performance in the laboratory. Prerequisites: PHYSL 210 or PHYSL 212/214 and consent from the course coordinator.
PHYSL 469 Undergraduate Research Thesis II =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-0-12). Taken in conjunction with PHYSL 468, this 6-credit course is the second part of a 12-credit program in two terms resulting in an honours research thesis in Physiology. Upon satisfactory progress in first-term PHYSL 468, students will continue their research and produce an honours thesis on their project. Students will be evaluated on a final oral presentation, a written research Thesis and performance in the laboratory. Prerequisites: PHYSL 210 or PHYSL 212/214 and consent from the course coordinator.
Graduate Courses
PHYSL 500 Reproductive Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to describe (i) the causes of infertility, (ii) therapeutic approaches to restore or enhance fertility and (iii) contraceptive approaches to avoid pregnancy. Lectures are the same as PHYSL 400, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit cannot be obtained for both PHYSL 400 and 500. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 501 Topics in Cardiovascular Physiology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The goal of PHYSL 501 is to develop critical appraisal and presentation skills in advanced undergraduate and graduate students. Through critical review of controversial topics in modern cardiovascular physiology, the participant will learn to appreciate that literature is a dynamic, changing and fallible source of information. Presentation skills are developed through both oral and written assignments and facility with the use of electronic library resources is encouraged. Course content varies from year to year. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210, 404 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 502 Problems in Current Research =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Individual study. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
PHYSL 503 Neuroendoimmunomodulation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). The physiological and pathophysiological interrelationships between the nervous, endocrine and immune systems. Prerequisites: consent of Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 504 Cardiovascular Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). General concepts in human cardiovascular physiology: properties of the myocardium, heart function, vascular biology, hemodynamics and control of cardiovascular system. Discussion of cardiovascular pathologies and relevant clinical situations. Prerequisites: consent of Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 505 Sensory Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The sensory systems in human physiology. The topics covered will be vision, hearing, vestibular mechanisms, taste, smell and touch, including receptor mechanisms and central organization. Prerequisites: consent of Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 506 Tutorial and Seminar Course =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Guided reading course. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once.
PHYSL 507 Molecular and Cellular Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The molecular and cellular aspects of physiological processes. Main areas include the structure and functions of plasma membranes (emphasizing transport processes, their regulation and methods of study) and the mechanism of action of hormones (hormonereceptor interactions, receptor regulation and interactions of intracellular mediators). The physiological significance of these processes will be stressed throughout. Prerequisites: consent of the Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 509 Homeostatic Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Advanced principles of regulatory mechanisms in human and mammalian physiology, with in depth analysis of interrelationships between different organ systems in the maintenance of homeostasis. Clinical and physiologic perspectives are highlighted in the demonstration of how organ systems interact in health and the disruption in homeostasis which occurs in disease. Contemporary topics in energy and cardiovascular homeostasis such as the physiological adaptations to pregnancy, exercise, obesity and diabetes will be explored using an integrative, systems physiology approach. Suitable as preparation for careers in medicine, biomedical research and health-related fields. Prerequisites: consent of the Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 513 Fetal Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The course stresses experimental approaches to understanding fetal physiology as well as the development and function of the fetus from ovulation to birth and adaptation to independent life. This course also deals with maternal physiology during pregnancy, complications of pregnancy, and newborn health. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210 and consent of Department.
PHYSL 544 Current Topics in Neuroscience =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). A lecture course emphasizing contemporary aspects of developmental, cellular, systems and cognitive neurophysiology. Topics will include experience-dependent processes in the development of the nervous system, the molecular and cellular mechanisms for learning and memory, the electrophysiology of rhythmic activity in identified brain circuits, the microphysiology of transmitter secretion, and the representation and transformation of information in the nervous system. Students will be expected to demonstrate a thorough understanding of selected readings from current and classical literature. Suitable for honors students in Physiology, Pharmacology, Psychology and Neuroscience. Prerequisites: consent of Department. Priority given to students registered in a graduate program. Note: this course is not open to students with credit in the corresponding PHYSL 400 level course.
PHYSL 545 Physiology of Transport Systems =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A consideration of transport mechanisms primarily from the physiological rather than biochemical viewpoint. Major models considered are the erythrocyte and a variety of epithelia from vertebrates. Designed for advanced undergraduate and graduate students. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisites: PHYSL 212 and 214, or 210, or ZOOL 241 and 242.
PHYSL 600 Colloquia in Physiology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This discussion course will provide an opportunity for Provisional PhD candidates in the Department of Physiology, prior to their candidacy examination, to research, present and critique publications in areas relevant to their research, but not their own research. Graded on a pass/fail basis. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Open to MSc students in the Department of Physiology.
#
Plant Science
PL SC
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS), Animal Science (AN SC), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Interdisciplinary (INT D), Nutrition (NUTR), Nutrition and Food Sciences (NU FS), Renewable Resources (REN R) and Soil Sciences (SOILS) course listings for related courses.
Undergraduate Courses
PL SC 100 Plants in our Lives =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Issues related to the importance of plants in our lives, including global food security, interactions between agriculture and the environment, the role of crops in human and animal nutrition, and the potential development of biofuels, biofibers, biopharmaceutical, and bioindustrial crops. Not available to students with *60 in Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences. This course does not substitute for PL SC 221 in the program core. Prerequisite: Biology 30 recommended.
PL SC 200 Urban Plants: Gardening and Sustainability Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-0-3). A hands-on, experiential education course taught at Devonian Botanic Garden. Students will learn relevant plant anatomy, an introduction to horticultural methods, garden plant basic needs, soil development, pruning practice, vegetable production examples, and contrast between home gardening and commercial production systems. Discussions and readings will incorporate sustainable practices, food security, local food movement, and environmental footprint.
PL SC 221 Introduction to Plant Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Principles of plant science for use in agriculture, forestry and environmental sciences. Emphasis on vascular plants in an applied context. Topics include: plant structure and function; reproduction and development; and diversity and management of vegetation and crops. Credit will only be given for one of PL SC 220, PL SC 221 or BOT 205. [Offered jointly by the Departments of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science and Renewable Resources].
PL SC 324 Crop Ecophysiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Study of crop production as influenced by plant- plant and plant-environment interactions, as well as management practices. Topics may include photosynthetic efficiency, growth analysis, competition and facilitation in monocrops and mixtures, response to climate change and environmental stress, use of genetically modified organisms and contrasting world crop production systems. Prerequisite: PL SC 221 or *3 200-level plant related course. Offered in even-numbered years.
PL SC 345 Plants for Bioproducts =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Agronomy, breeding, biochemistry, biotechnology, and ecological issues related to production of plants for bioproducts. Topics selected from biodiesel, fuel ethanol, biolubricants, bioplastic, platform biochemicals, and starch and protein for nonfood applications. Prerequisite: BIOL 107, PL SC 221 or CHEM 164 (or equivalent).
PL SC 352 Invasive Alien Plants: Biology and Control =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Biology and ecology of invasive alien species in cropped, disturbed, and natural environments. Methods of control of weedy species, including biological, cultural, mechanical, and chemical and an introduction to the herbicide mechanism of action and environmental impacts. Prerequisite: PL SC 221 recommended.
PL SC 354 Forage Crops =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The establishment, management, conservation and utilization of forages. Morphological structure and adaptation of the principal forage grasses and legumes. Prerequisite: PL SC 221 or consent of Instructor.
PL SC 355 Cereal, Oilseed, and Pulse Crops =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3/2). The role of cereals, oilseeds, and pulse crops in Western Canadian agricultural systems. Their botanical, physiological, agricultural, and market quality characteristics. Prerequisite: PL SC 221 or consent of Instructor.
PL SC 365 Genetic Improvement of Crop Plants =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the basic principles and concepts applied for the genetic improvement of crop plants. This will also include different plant breeding methods and tools used for the development of crop cultivars. Credit will only be given for one of PL SC 365 and 465. Prerequisites: BIOL 107 or PL SC 221.
PL SC 380 Principles of Plant Pathology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An introduction to plant diseases; the nature of nonparasitic and parasitic causal agents such as air pollutants, temperature, viruses, bacteria, fungi, higher plants and nematodes; principles involved in disease prevention and control. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 recommended.
PL SC 400 Individual Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Project or reading course supervised by a Faculty member, requiring preparation of a comprehensive report. Prerequisites: *60 of university courses or higher and consent of the instructor. Note: may be taken more than once if topic is different.
PL SC 470 Physiology of Herbicidal Action =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Absorption, translocation, degradation, mechanism of action. Offered in even-numbered years. Prerequisites: PL SC 352 and (BOT 240 or 340).
PL SC 481 Diseases of Field and Horticultural Crops =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Diseases of cereal, oilseed, pulse, forage, vegetable, fruit and ornamental crops. Offered in odd-numbered years. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 582). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 582 and PL SC 481. Prerequisite: PL SC 380 or consent of instructor.
PL SC 491 Biotechnology for Crop Improvement =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The use of biotechnology, including genetic engineering, to improve crop plants. Topics covered will include developing genetically modified organisms (GMOs) with an emphasis on crop plants, the application of specific techniques to improve crop productivity, enhancing nutritional characteristics, phytoremediation and the production of pharmaceuticals and other plant products. Prerequisites: BIOL 207 or (BIOL 107 and PL SC 221). BOT 205 and (BIOCH 200 or PL SC 331) recommended. Credit will only be given for one of BOT 382 or PL SC 491.
PL SC 495 Integrated Crop Protection =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Integrated agronomic, mechanical, biological, and chemical control of insects, disease organisms and weeds that interfere with field crop and horticultural crop production. Graduate students may not register for credit (see AFNS 595). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 595 and PL SC 495. Prerequisites: At least two of ENT 207, PL SC 352 or 380, and the third as a corequisite.
PL SC 499 Cropping Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). The crop rotations, pest management, nutrient cycling, and economic and ecological sustainability of specific Alberta cropping systems will be examined. The lab will consist of a field tour in which students interact with researchers and agronomists from across Alberta. Classes will be a balance of lectures, integrating agronomic principles within the framework of Alberta cropping systems, and team project work. Field tour begins generally 5 days prior to the start of classes. Prerequisites: PL SC 355 and SOILS 210. PL SC 324, 352 and SOILS 460 recommended. Open to fourth-year students in the Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) 400-level courses in PL SC and ENCS 407 may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee. 300-level courses may be taken for credit by graduate students with approval of the AFNS Graduate Program Committee. (See §174.1.1(1))
(2) See Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science (AFNS) listings for related courses.
#
Polish
POLSH
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with Polish language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit if a course is completed which the student is deemed ineligible to take, based on their prior background. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Slavic and East European Studies (SLAV) listings, and INT D courses offered by the Faculty of Arts.
Undergraduate Courses
POLSH 111 Beginners’ Polish I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Essentials of grammar, reading, pronunciation. Designed to give a working knowledge of the Polish language. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in POLSH 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Polish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries
POLSH 112 Beginners’ Polish II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: POLSH 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in POLSH 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Polish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
POLSH 211 Second-Year Polish I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Intermediate grammar, composition, and oral practice based on selected texts of Polish classical and contemporary literature. Prerequisite: POLSH 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in POLSH 201 or 202.
POLSH 212 Second-Year Polish II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). A continuation of POLSH 211, with greater emphasis on reading and composition. Prerequisite: POLSH 211. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in POLSH 202.
POLSH 303 Advanced Polish I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Films, short literary texts and journalistic prose serve as the basis for composition and discussion. Prerequisite: POLSH 212 or consent of Department.
POLSH 304 Advanced Polish II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: POLSH 303 or consent of Department.
POLSH 407 Business Polish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Specialized language of business in Polish, especially its managing and marketing aspects. Prerequisite: POLSH 304 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in POLSH 307.
POLSH 443 Polish-English Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to translation theories and practice as applied to Polish. Exercises in translation of minimal textual units (written and oral) with emphasis on nonliterary texts. Prerequisite: POLSH 212 or consent of Department. Note: Formerly POLSH 441. Not open to students with credit in POLSH 441.
POLSH 444 English-Polish Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Semantic-syntactic theories of translation and practice. Exercises in translation of written and oral textual units with emphasis on literary and artistic texts. Prerequisite: POLSH 212 or consent of Department. Note: Formerly POLSH 442. Not open to students with credit in POLSH 442.
POLSH 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Political Science
POL S
Department of Political Science Faculty of Arts
Note: See also INT D 393, a course offered by more than one Department which may be taken as an options or as a course in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
POL S 101 Introduction to Politics =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to major political concepts and to the study of politics. Note: Not open to students with credit in POL S 100 or 103.
POL S 211 Introduction to History of Political Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how texts from the history of western political theory, from ancient Greece to the 20th century, help to deepen and diversify our understanding of themes like justice, freedom, equality, property, rights, and democracy. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 210. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 212 Introduction to Contemporary Political Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores how texts in contemporary western political theory help to deepen and diversify our understanding of current political themes like war, climate change, sex, work, or democratic reform. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 210. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 223 City Government and Politics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected public policies of city governments and the political and administrative processes through which they are produced. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 224 Canadian Government Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the constitutional and institutional foundations of Canadian government. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 220. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 225 Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the context and dynamics of Canadian politics. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 220. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 235 Introduction to Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines the concepts and approaches used to compare political issues across countries and regions. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 230 or 240. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 250 The Politics of Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of gender, diversity and relations of power in political life. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 261 International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to contemporary international relations that attempts to develop an understanding of political events at the international level. The course covers the nature of foreign policy, the dynamics of interactions between states, the causes of war, imperialism and the role of non-state actors. Not to be taken by students with credit in POL S 260. Prerequisite: POL S 101 or consent of Department.
POL S 299 Citizenship for Democracy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Power, politics and political activism. Approaches to participatory and democratic citizenship.
POL S 302 Topics in Political Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 211, 212 (or 210) or Department consent.
POL S 304 Modern Political Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Diverse perspectives on rights, revolution, and democracy through the work of theorists like Burke, Wollstonecraft, de Tocqueville, Douglass, Marx, and Mill. Prerequisite: POL S 210 or 211 or 212 or consent of Department.
POL S 305 Contemporary Political Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focuses on struggles over citizenship, the self, and social justice through the work of theorists like Arendt, Beauvoir, Freud, Fanon, Foucault, Rawls, and Tully. Prerequisite: POL S 210 or 211 or 212 or consent of Department.
POL S 321 The Politics of Health Care in Canada I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 18 hours). The development of Canada’s health care system, its legislative and philosophical grounds, as well as financing and delivery. Note: Open only to students in the Faculty of Nursing. Not open to students with credit in SC PO 320.
POL S 322 The Politics of Health Care in Canada II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 18 hours). Current stresses in the health care system such as challenges to universality; alternative health delivery system from a comparative perspective. Note: Open only to students in the Faculty of Nursing. Not open to students with credit in SC PO 320. Prerequisite: POL S 321.
POL S 324 Topics in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 326 Canadian Health Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines major health care issues and the interaction of the key ideas, institutions and interests that shape the Canadian health care system. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 327 Aboriginal Peoples and Politics in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an examination of different historical and contemporary issues associated with Aboriginal politics. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220), NS 110 or 111.
POL S 328 Managing Modern Government Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include government organization and administration, budgets, policy making, and democratic control and accountability. The focus is on Canada, but other countries are also considered. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225, (or 220 or 230) or Department consent.
POL S 330 Urbanization and Urban Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the major theoretical traditions and key contributions of Political Science to the study of urban development. Prerequisite: One of POL S 223, 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 332 Introduction to United States Politics and Government Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The actors, institutions, and processes of American politics and governance, and the forces that influence them. Prerequisite: Any of the 200-level POL S core courses or consent of Department.
POL S 333 Ecology and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines different approaches to understanding the links between politics, society and ecology. Prerequisites: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 334 North American Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative study of political institutions of Canada, Mexico, and the United States, and their interaction with NAFTA. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235, 261 (or 230, 240, or 260) or Department consent
POL S 354 Topics in Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The focus of this course changes yearly to reflect current issues in comparative politics and faculty research interests. Information about the specific topics can be obtained from the Department. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 359 Topics in International Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines contemporary controversies in international politics. Information about specific topics are available from the Department. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 360 Politics of International Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The theories that shape international development, and the actors and institutions involved. Prerequisite: One of POL S 230, 235, 261 (or 240 or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 364 Introduction to International Political Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an introduction to the ideas, institutions, and forces which are shaping the new international political economy. It examines the politics of trading blocks such as NAFTA and the EU, North-South relations, and the interactions of markets and states in the global economy. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235, 261 (or 230, 240, or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 365 Canadian Foreign Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major trends and developments in Canadian foreign policy since 1945. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 370 Politics of the European Union Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of European Union institutions, processes, politics, and policy issues. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235, 261 (or 230, 240, or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 374 Politics and Society of Postcolonial Africa Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An intensive survey of selected African politics and societies from colonialism to globalization. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 240), MEAS major/minor or Department consent.
POL S 375 Politics of East Asia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A comprehensive introduction to East Asian politics in the postwar period, covering Greater China (Mainland, Taiwan and Hong Kong), Japan and the two Koreas. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 240), East Asian Studies Major/Minor or Department consent.
POL S 380 Politics in the Middle East Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Evolution, future, and global significance of Middle Eastern regional politics. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 390 Law and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Relationships between law and politics in Canada and the United States including dispute resolution, societal and governmental influences on the judiciary, the policy-making role of courts, and the criminal process. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225, 235, (or 220, 230 or 332) or Department consent.
POL S 391 Canadian Political Parties Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics include party systems; ideologies and programs, members and supporters, organization and resources, and electoral and governmental activities. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 399 Third-Year Honors Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Research design and research methods for Political Science Honors Students. Note: Restricted to Honors Students in Third Year or those with consent of Department.
POL S 404 Topics in Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 211, 212 (or 210) or Department consent.
POL S 405 Democratic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An investigation of different conceptions of democracy in political thought. Prerequisite: One of POL S 211, 212 (or 210) or Department consent.
POL S 410 Topics in Contemporary Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical examination of contemporary trends in political philosophy. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 211, 212 (or 210) or Department consent.
POL S 417 Philosophical Issues of Human Rights Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An enquiry into the idea(s) of human rights and the adequacy of their philosophical grounding. Prerequisite: One of POL S 211, 212 (or 210) or Department consent.
POL S 418 Media and Politics in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Political roles played by mainstream and social media in Canada. Prerequisite: POL S 224 and 225.
POL S 419 Politics of the Canadian Constitution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The political implications of judicial decisions in the areas of civil liberties, federal-provincial relations and international agreements. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 421 Topics in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The focus of this seminar changes yearly to reflect current issues in Canadian politics and faculty research interests. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225, (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 423 Canadian Federalism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The analysis of the development and theories of Canadian Federalism. Attention will be given to current problems of the federal system. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 424 Health Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Examining public policy making structures and processes. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 429 Government and Politics of Alberta Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The study of selected aspects of Alberta government and politics. Topics may range from political institutions, through political parties, to areas of public policy. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 433 City Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The theory and practice of city politics in modern Canada. The course will normally employ as resource persons senior elected and appointed officials from governments. Prerequisite: One of POL S 220, 224, 225, 230, 235, 240 (or 223) or Department consent.
POL S 435 Metropolitan Government Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The comparative study of the political economy of metropolitan government. Prerequisite: One of POL S 220, 224, 225, 235 (or 223, 230, or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 440 Topics in Canadian Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics of contemporary interest in Canadian public policy. Information about the specific topic is available from the Department. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 441 Gender and Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The relationship between gender and public policy in Canada. Of particular concern are effects of restructuring, decentralization, privatization and deregulation on women. Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220 or 350) or Department consent.
POL S 442 The Canadian State and Identity Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The relative power, impact and interconnections of both territorial (regional) divisions and other non-territorial divisions (e.g. gender, race, ethnicity, and class). Prerequisite: One of POL S 224, 225 (or 220) or Department consent.
POL S 443 Globalization, Ethnic Politics and the Nation-State Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories of nationalism and the nation-state in an era of globalization. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 444 Global Critical Race Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Politics of race, racialisation and anti-racism in international and comparative perspective. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235, 261 (or 230, 240 or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 445 Topics in Globalization and Governance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235, 261 (or 230, 240, or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 448 Gender Politics and Mass Media Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Ways in which mass media socially construct and politicize gender. Prerequisite: Any 200-level POL S or WGS.
POL S 450 Topics in Comparative Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Seminar in major areas of comparative theory such as political economy and the politics of collective action. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 452 Politics in the Middle East and North Africa Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines contemporary social movements and revolutions in the Middle East and North Africa. Prerequisite: One of POL S 230, 235, 240; 380; or Department consent.
POL S 455 Topics in Gender and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of any 200-level POL S course, POL S 350 or Department consent.
POL S 458 United States Foreign Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The contemporary foreign policies of the United States and their causes. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 459 Topics in International Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 460 Global Security Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Historical and contemporary political issues of global security are examined from various theoretical perspectives. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 461 International Relations of the Middle East Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary international politics of the Middle East. Prerequisite: One of POL S 260, 261; 380; or Department consent.
POL S 462 Political Economy of Global Governance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Competing analytical frameworks within international political economy; social and ideological dimensions of governance in a globalized world. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 468 International Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An examination of theoretical debates on international cooperation and international institutions and their application to contemporary international politics. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 469 Ethics in International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Sources of and debates on ethical issues in international relations, especially surrounding human rights, economic justice and war. Prerequisite: One of POL S 261 (or 260) or Department consent.
POL S 470 Topics in Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Selected topics of current interest in comparative politics and government. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 475 Politics of China and Japan Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Domestic politics and foreign policy of China and/ or Japan. Note: Not open to students with credit in POL S 473. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 240 or 375) East Asian Studies major/minor or Department consent.
POL S 477 Topics in Islamic Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Political ideas and practice in Islamic countries, including historical and contemporary constructions of Islam. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 240 or 380) or Department consent.
POL S 479 NGO Governance and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Organizational features, actor/stakeholder relationships, and management challenges contemporary NGOs face. Prerequisite: POL S 235 or 261 or consent of Department.
POL S 483 United States Constitutional Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual liberties and the equal protection of groups in the United States, focusing on court rulings about the Bill of Rights and 14th Amendment, controversies over constitutional interpretation, and the political of rights. Prerequisite: One of POL S 390, 419 or Department consent; also open to Law students.
POL S 484 Topics in United States Politics and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: POL S 332 or Department consent.
POL S 486 Topics in European Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current debates in Europe, including the emergence of new radical right parties, green parties and movements, market liberalization and political change in Eastern and Central Europe, and the resurgence of nationalist discourses. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230) or Department consent.
POL S 487 Topics in European Union Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230) or Department consent.
POL S 488 The Politics of Mexico Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Mexico’s post-revolutionary politics, its current dynamics, and their continental impacts. Prerequisite: One of POL S 235 (or 230 or 240) or Department consent.
POL S 499 Honors Essay: Fourth-Year Honors Political Science Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors Essay, required in the fourth year of the Honors program. Prerequisite: POL S 399.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) See also INT D 593 for a course which are offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
(2) Consent of Department is required for all 500- and 600-level courses.
POL S 505 Democratic Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An investigation of different conceptions of democracy in political thought. Not open to students with credit in POL S 405.
POL S 514 Topics in Contemporary Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 515 Topics in Political Philosophy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 517 Philosophical Issues of Human Rights Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An enquiry into the idea(s) of human rights and the adequacy of their philosophical grounding. Not open to students with credit in POL S 417.
POL S 520 Topics in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 522 Canadian Federalism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 526 Selected Topics in Urban Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 540 Topics in Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 542 The Canadian State and Identity Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The relative power, impact and interconnections of both territorial (regional) divisions and other non-territorial divisions (e.g., gender, race, ethnicity, and class).
POL S 543 Globalization, Ethnic Politics and the Nation-State Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories of nationalism and the nation-state in an era of globalization.
POL S 544 Global Critical Race Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Politics of race, racialisation and anti-racism in international and comparative perspective.
POL S 551 Topics in Comparative Politics: Industrialized Countries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 558 Gender Politics and Mass Media Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Ways in which mass media socially construct and politicize gender. Prerequisite: Any 200-level POL S or WGS.
POL S 560 Topics in International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 561 International Relations of the Middle East Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Contemporary international politics of the Middle East.
POL S 565 Topics in Foreign Policy Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current approaches to the study of foreign policy that focuses the explanations upon factors within the state.
POL S 566 Topics in International Political Economy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 571 Topics in Comparative Politics: Comparative Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 578 Asian Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 579 NGO Governance and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Organizational features, actor/stakeholder relationships, and management challenges contemporary NGOs face.
POL S 580 European Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 596 Topics in Gender and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 598 The Work of Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Participation in an approved internship program including both work experience and academic components. Department approval must be acquired before initiating the internship. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s and internship co-ordinator’s or graduate co-ordinator’s performance appraisals and will be assessed on a credit/non-credit basis.
POL S 599 Introduction to the Discipline of Political Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An introduction to the professional skills and ethics training expected in Political Science as an academic discipline. POL S 599 is graded on a pass/fail basis.
POL S 600 Theories and Methods of Comparative Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Traditional and critical perspectives.
POL S 610 Political Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A review of major thinkers and themes. Core course for PhD students preparing comprehensive exams in political theory.
POL S 621 Canadian Government and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The advanced study of politics, government and political science in Canada.
POL S 622 Contemporary Canadian Political Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Current debates in Canadian politics and public policy.
POL S 629 Readings in Canadian Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 650 Comparative Studies in Industrialized Countries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A survey of the study of the politics of industrialized countries. Concepts, theories, and analyses of various state and society issues will be examined.
POL S 660 Theories of International Politics I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A review and critique of the traditional theories of international politics and their contemporary challenges.
POL S 668 Readings in International Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 670 Studies in Comparative Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A survey of the critical concepts and theories in development politics.
POL S 680 Theories and Methods of Political Inquiry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Required course for PhD students.
POL S 690 Gender and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A survey of various theoretical perspectives on gender, ranging from liberal to postmodern, as well as issues and debates in gender research. Also addressed are questions of difference, identity, and conflict arising from, among others, race, class, sexuality, and north-south relations.
POL S 696 Readings in Gender and Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
POL S 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
POL S 906 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned).
#
Portuguese
PORT
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with Portuguese language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit if a course is completed which the student is deemed ineligible to take, based on their prior background. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) Student who have or will attain advanced standing in Spanish equivalent to SPAN 300 are not permitted to claim more than *6 credit for the study of Portuguese.
Undergraduate Courses
PORT 111 Beginners’ Portuguese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A basic course for students with no previous knowledge of Portuguese. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in PORT 100, or with native or near native proficiency or with Portuguese 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
PORT 112 Beginners’ Portuguese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: PORT 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in PORT 100, or with native or near native proficiency or with Portuguese 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
PORT 211 Intermediate Portuguese I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Intended to consolidate a basic understanding of Portuguese through a systematic grammar review and practice in various language skills. Prerequisite: Portuguese 30 (or equivalent), PORT 112 or SPAN 212 or consent of Department.
PORT 212 Intermediate Portuguese II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: PORT 211 or consent of Department.
PORT 221 Portuguese for Spanish Speaker I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Accelerated introduction to the grammar, vocabulary, usage and cultural contexts of Portuguese for speakers of Spanish. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
PORT 222 Portuguese for Spanish Speaker II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Further accelerated practice in Portuguese grammar, vocabulary, and cultural contexts of Portuguese. Prerequisite: PORT 221 or consent of the Department.
#
Postgraduate Dental Education
PGDE
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
PGDE 912 Postgraduate Dental Education Œ0 (fi 12) (two term, 52 weeks). This general residency program is one calendar year in length., July 1 through June 30. Six DDS graduates are accepted each year, those accepted primarily being DDS graduates in the year in which they begin the residency. Under the direction of dental specialists and general practitioners, residents will provide care to patients who cannot be seen by undergraduate dental students because of the complexity and/or scope of the required treatment. Through seminar sessions and clinical teaching, the areas of endodontics, periodontics, prosthodontics, oral surgery, dental implants, pediatric dentistry, hospital dentistry, conscious sedation, advanced oral diagnosis and treatment planning, oral medicine, orofacial pain and advanced general dentistry are taught. Residents will also be involved in the University of Alberta Hospital Dental Service, providing clinical treatment to patients during scheduled daytime clinics, evening and weekend emergency walk-in clinics and on -call. An important additional component of this residency program is off site rotations to underserved areas of this province.
#
Postgraduate Medical Education
PGME
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
PGME 901 One-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 1) (variable, 4 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 902 Two-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 2) (variable, 8 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 903 Three-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 3) (variable, 12 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 904 Four-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 4) (variable, 16 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 905 Five-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 5) (variable, 20 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 906 Six-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 6) (variable, 24 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
PGME 912 Twelve-Month Medical Traineeship Œ0 (fi 12) (variable, 52 weeks). This represents a contract period of registration with variable start and end dates for MD graduates who are completing training either as a Resident or as a Fellow. The focus of the traineeship is based upon the area of specialization. Prerequisites: MD degree and approval by the Division of Postgraduate Medical Education.
#
Psychiatry
PSYCI
Department of Psychiatry
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
PSYCI 546 Psychiatry Student Internship Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 6 weeks). Student internship in psychiatry for students registered in the MD program.
Graduate Courses
PSYCI 511 Biological Aspects of Psychiatry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Lectures and seminars on: classification, description and measurement of psychiatric disorders; sleep disorders; biochemical theories of psychiatric disorders, and discussions of how the actions of the drugs used to treat these disorders relate to these theories; practical aspects of drug treatment; biological markers; brain imaging; women’s health issues; herbal products and psychiatry. Prerequisite: Permission of Department.
PSYCI 515 Maternal, Child and Adolescent Mental Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Lectures and seminars on mental health from the perspective of the developing child and adolescent. As the foundations of mental health are determined by the complex interplay of genetics and the environment, issues related to maternal mental health and potential impact on the developing foetus are also examined. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
PSYCI 601 Theory and Practice of Psychiatry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth analysis of current psychiatric practice in relation to diagnosis, choice of treatment and evaluation of clinical responses. Emphasis will be placed on current research in selected areas of psychiatry. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PSYCI 602 Advanced Topics in Psychiatry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A discussion of selected topics of current interest in psychiatry including neurobiological and psychosocial aspects of the etiology and treatment of mental disorders. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PSYCI 603 Psychiatry Tutorial, Research and Reading Course Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course allows a student to study an area of psychiatry in much greater detail than usual. Format is usually a reading/tutorial in which the student carries out directed reading and meets with the tutor regularly. Term papers will be used for evaluation purposes. The course requires independent study. Students who have a particular interest in any specific area in psychiatry are encouraged to meet with Faculty members to explore the possibly of arranging a suitable topic. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PSYCI 604 Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Seminar course with lectures and reading-based class discussion on recent cognitive-affective neuroscience findings in psychiatry. All psychiatric disorders are characterised by alterations in emotions, thoughts and cognition, yet neuroscientific evidence to corroborate and refine this observation has only recently begun to be integrated into psychiatric theory and research. Readings (updated annually) and discussions will review neural manifestations of cognitive-affective disturbances across and within mental illnesses. Following introductory lecture sessions, students will review, analyze and discuss in class recent neurocognitive findings in psychiatry. The goal of this course is to promote a neurobiological understanding of cognitive-affective changes within and across mental illnesses. Prerequisites: PSYCO 375 or NEURO 210 or PSYCO 377 or consent of the Department.
PSYCI 688 Graduate Seminar Œ0 (fi 2) (two term, 0-1s-0). Graduate students in the Department of Psychiatry will be required to attend this weekly seminar series. Each student will be required to present two seminars per two-term period; one related directly to their own research, and one on another topic.
#
Psychology
PSYCO
Department of Psychology Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses Faculty of Arts Courses
Note: Prerequisites to some Arts courses in the Department may be found in the following Science section of this listing.
PSYCO 105 Individual and Social Behavior =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1/4). Introduction to the study of human individuality, personality, and social psychological processes. Some aspects of normal and abnormal human development, psychological assessment and treatment may be reviewed. Fulfillment of the ¼ laboratory credit typically entails serving as a research participant but can be fulfilled through the completion of alternative assignments. Prerequisite: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 106 Psychological Principles for Nursing Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Psychological principles and processes as they relate to training, including research, design and analysis, lifespan development, memory and cognitive processing, social psychological processes, personality, psychological disorders and their treatment. Note: Open only to students enrolled in Nursing. Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, or PSYCO 105. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 212 Introduction to Research Methods in Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Experimental and nonexperimental methods in psychology. Topics covered include philosophy of science, measurement, reliability and validity of methods, measures, and effects; experimental quasi-experimental, and single-subject designs; biases in experimentation; and research ethics. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105, and STAT 141 or 151. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 223 Lifespan Developmental Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to biological, cognitive and social aspects of psychological development. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105 or equivalent. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 239 Abnormal Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nature and treatment of psychological disorders, such as cross-disciplinary perspectives and an emphasis on improving understanding of psychopathology in everyday life. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105. Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 339. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 241 Social Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of theories and research on the individual in a social context. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105 or equivalent. Note: PSYCO 241 and SOC 241 may not both be taken for credit. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 300 Honors Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). A range of conceptual and methodological issues in psychology are considered, and students receive intensive training and practice in both written and oral communications. The seminar meets once a week for the full Fall/Winter period. Restricted to, and required of, third-year students in the Arts Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 303 History of Ideas in Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Psychological ideas from ancient times to the beginning of cognitive science in the mid 20th century. Prerequisite: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, PSYCO 105; one 200-level PSYCO offered by the Faculty of Arts; one 200-level PSYCO offered by the Faculty of Science. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 305 Special Topics in Psychology I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review and discussion of special topics or methods in one or more of the areas of contemporary psychology such as developmental, social, personality, cognitive. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105. Note: Consult with the Department for the specific topic offered each year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 323 Infant and Child Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biological, cognitive and social aspects of psychological development during the period from infancy to childhood. Prerequisite: PSYCO 223. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 325 Applied Research in Developmental Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Integration of developmental theories and research with an emphasis on practical approaches to support healthy development. Students volunteer with a local agency to work with infants, children, or adolescents. May be offered as a Community-Service Learning course. Prerequisite: PSYCO 223. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 327 Adolescent Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Biological, cognitive, and social aspects of development that occur during the period from early to late adolescence. Prerequisite: PSYCO 223. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 329 Adult Development and Aging =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of physical, psychological, and sociocultural realities of aging. This course may be offered as a Community Service-Learning course. Prerequisite: PSYCO 223. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 333 Personality Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth treatment of psychological theories of personality. Prerequisites: PSYCO 223, 239, or 241. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 233 or PSYCO 305 Topic: Personality. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 335 Introduction to Clinical Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of the profession of clinical psychology, including topics such as case studies to examine diagnosis and assessment, judgement and decision making, and psychotherapeutic and community interventions. Prerequisite: PSYCO 239. Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 435. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 341 Cultural Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to psychological approaches to the study of culture, including cross-cultural psychology, cultural psychology, indigenous psychologies, and the psychology of ethnicity and intercultural contact. Prerequisites: one of PSYCO 223, 233, or 241. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 342 Social Influence Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to research on social influence, including theory and empirical research on conformity, compliance, and obedience. Prerequisites: PSYCO 241 or SOC 241. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 305 Topic: Social Influence. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 343 Culture and Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to cultural psychology, including theoretical bases of, and empirical studies in cultural psychology, and some critiques towards this field of research. Prerequisite: PSYCO 241 or PSYCO 258. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 344 Intercultural Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of theory and research on communication processes in intercultural social interactions. Prerequisites: PSYCO 105. Note: Not open to students with previous credit in PSYCO 405 Topic: Intercultural Communications [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 347 Interpersonal Relationships Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A general overview of research and theory in the domain of relationships, based on classic and contemporary findings from the social psychological literature. Most of the course content will focus on adult romantic relationships. Prerequisites: PSYCO 241 or SOC 241. Note: Not open to students with credit in HECOL 210 or PSYCO 305 Topic: Interpersonal Relationships. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 350 Human Memory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the study of human memory. Topics include verbal learning and interference theory, the short-term/long- term memory distinction, semantic memory, working memory, sensory memory, autobiographical memory, amnesia, and implicit memory. The emphasis will be on developing coherent theoretical accounts of the evidence. Prerequisite: PSYCO 258. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 357 Language Processing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of theories and research on the production and comprehension of spoken and written language. Topics include speech perception, printed word recognition, sentence production and comprehension, discourse processing, reading, language development, and language pathologies. The focus will be on the processing mechanisms implicated by findings in the area. Prerequisite: PSYCO 258. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 398 Individual Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). A course designed to allow the senior undergraduate student the opportunity to pursue a supervised research project in greater depth than the classroom structure permits. Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Psychology Department. Successful completion of this course requires a formal research proposal or report, lab notes, and/or essay. Normally for students in their third year of study. Cannot be taken more than twice. Prerequisite: a 200-level PSYCO course and consent of the Department. Specific projects may require additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 399 Honors Thesis I: Research Apprenticeship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Under the direction of a Faculty member, students pursue a topic of interest leading to the development of a thesis proposal and, during their fourth year, the thesis research. The work normally involves both directed readings and empirical research experience. Restricted to, and required of, third-year students in the Arts Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 400 Honors Seminar II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). A continuation of PSYCO 300, with an emphasis on the development of professional skills. Topics include the new information technologies, the publication process, ethical issues, and the application of research findings to real-world problems. The seminar meets once a week for the full Fall/ Winter period. Prerequisite: PSYCO 300. Restricted to, and required of, fourth-year students in the Arts Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 405 Special Topics in Psychology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review and discussion of special theoretical or methodological topics, or a novel or emerging research areas in contemporary psychology. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and PSYCO 105, and STAT 141 or 151. Note: Consult with the Department for the specific topic offered each year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 411 Cooperative Program Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Required by all students who have just completed the on-site portion of the Psychology Cooperative Program. The course will involve completion and defense of the practicum report and discussion of related issues. Prerequisites: WKEXP 961, WKEXP 962, and WKEXP 963. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 412 Quantitative Methods in Sociocultural Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). The assumptions that inform the design of experimental, quasi-experimental, and field studies in sociocultural psychology; the development of scales, questionnaires, and survey instruments, and the coordination of quantitative and qualitative research methods. Prerequisites: PSYCO 212, and one of PSYCO 223, 233, 241, or 341. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 415 Qualitative Methods in Sociocultural Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). The assumptions that inform the design of qualitative research in sociocultural psychology; the procedures for gathering meaningful information through interviews, conversation, observed interaction, and textual archives; and the analysis of such information. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151, and PSYCO 212, and one of PSYCO 223, 233, 241, or 341. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 423 Advanced Topics in Developmental Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth review and analysis of research in an area of developmental psychology. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151, and PSYCO 323 or PSYCO 327 or 329. Note: Consult with the Department for the specific topic offered each year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 431 Theory and Practice of Psychometrics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). The nature of psychological tests: some practical work in administration, scoring and interpretation of tests. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 and PSYCO 333 or 335. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 432 Psychological Studies of Dreaming Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of dream studies, including the psychology of dreaming, dreaming and cognition, personality and dreaming, therapeutic dream use, and dreams in art and culture. Prerequisite: one of PSYCO 223, 233, 241, 333, or 341. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 436 Psychology of Self-Estrangement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic description of self-deception and self- estrangement in psychoanalytic and existential humanistic theories. Discussion of basic determinants of self-deception and, alternatively, self-awareness, as well as considerations of the methods of inquiry appropriate to the area. Prerequisite: One of PSYCO 223, 233, 241, 333, or 341. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 440 Advanced Topics in Culture and Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: PSYCO 341 or PSYCO 343 [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 443 Social Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced treatment of topics in the study of how we think about the world of persons and events. Topics may include the role of categories, schemas, theories, and heuristics in social cognition, factors underlying the stereotyping of persons and groups, and the question of motivated bias in social perception. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 and PSYCO 241. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 445 Social Psychology and Cinema Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to use a combination of social psychological theory, research and feature length films to explore the psychological determinants of important forms of human social behavior. Topics include the existential realities of the human condition, aggression, obedience, prejudice, attraction, and relationships. Prerequisites: One of STAT 141 or 151 or PSYCO 212, and one of PSYCO 333, 342, 343, or 347. PSYCO 212 is strongly recommended. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 405 Topic: Studies of Self Through Cinema. [Faculty of Arts].
PSYCO 447 Self and Identity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of theory and research on the self, primarily from a social psychological perspective. Prerequisites: One of STAT 141 or 151 or PSYCO 212, and one of PSYCO 342 or PSYCO 347. PSYCO 212 is strongly recommended. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 405 Topic: Self and Identity. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 455 Speech Perception Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Overview of the historical development and current issues in the investigation of speech perception. Prerequisite: PSYCO 357 or LING 205. Note: Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 405 Topic: Speech Perception or LING 455. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 490 Honors Thesis II: Thesis Research Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Under the direction of a faculty member, students conduct an empirical research project culminating in the Honors Thesis. Prerequisite: PSYCO 399. Restricted to, and required of, fourth-year students in the Arts Honors psychology program. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 495 Psychology of Aesthetics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the psychological analysis of response to art. Consideration is both theoretical and empirical. Illustrative materials are drawn from several arts, including painting, sculpture and literature. The contribution of aesthetic behavior to personality development is considered. Prerequisites: One of PSYCO 233, 241, or 341; and a senior level course in ART, ART H, C LIT, DES, DRAMA, ENGL, F ST, MUSIC or WRITE. [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 498 Individual Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). A course intended to allow the senior undergraduate student the opportunity to pursue a research topic in greater depth than the classroom structure permits. This pursuit may take the form of directed reading, library research, and/or laboratory experience. A formal paper, research proposal, research report, annotated bibliography, lab notes, and/or essay is required. Cannot be taken more than twice. Prerequisites: A 300-level psychology course and consent of Department. [Faculty of Arts]
Faculty of Science Courses
PSYCO 104 Basic Psychological Processes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1/4). Principles and development of perception, motivation, learning, and thinking and their relationship to the psychological functioning of the individual. Fulfillment of the 1/4 laboratory credit typically entails serving as a research participant, but can be fulfilled through the completion of alternative assignments. The course is a prerequisite to all courses in the department and is normally followed by PSYCO 105. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 258 Cognitive Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of findings of theoretical issues in the study of cognition, such as perception, attention, knowledge representation, memory, learning, language, reasoning, and problem solving. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 275 Brain and Behavior =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to brain mechanisms involved in sensation, perception, movement, motivation, learning, and cognition, as studied in both humans and lower animals. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100, and Biology 30 or equivalent. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 282 Behavior Modification =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of applications of learning principles and laboratory findings to behavior problems in educational, clinical, and social settings, with emphasis on empirical research demonstrating the effectiveness of behavior modification and cognitive/behavioral techniques. Not open to students with credit in PSYCO 281. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 299 Research Opportunity Program in Psychology Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-0-3). A credit/no-credit course for supervised participation in a faculty research project. Normally taken after completion of a minimum of *30 but not more than *60. Prerequisites: GPA of 2.5 or higher, PSYCO 104 or SCI 100 and one other PSYCO course; and consent of Department. Specific projects may require additional prerequisites. Project and course information available at ROPP website or Department of Psychology. Prospective enrollees in PSYCO 299 must apply to the Department of Psychology. Note: Application does not guarantee an ROPP position. Credit may be obtained twice. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 302 Special Topics in Psychological Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review and discussion of special topics or methods in one or more of the areas of contemporary psychology such as experimental, perception, physiological, learning, memory, behavior, quantitative. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100 and PSYCO 105 and one 200-level Psychology course. Students must check with the Department for the topics for the year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 304 History of Modern Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the scientific discipline of psychology since the mid-20th century. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100 and PSYCO 105; one 200-level PSYCO offered by the Faculty of Arts; one 200-level PSYCO offered by the Faculty of Science. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 309 Honors Seminar I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). A range of conceptual and methodological issues in psychology are considered, and students receive intensive training and practice in both written and oral communications. The seminar meets once a week for the full Fall/Winter period. Restricted to, and required of, third-year students in the Science Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 351 Spatial Cognition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will survey research on how people learn and remember spatial information, and navigate their environments. Topics may include neurology, individual differences, cultural and cross-species comparisons. Prerequisites: One of: PSYCO 258, 267 or 275. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 354 Foundations of Cognitive Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theories and research practices of cognitive science by examining contributions of cognitive psychology, artificial intelligence, linguistics, and neuroscience to a variety of research areas. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and PSYCO 258. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 356 Research Methods in Cognition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A detailed examination of some of the common methods used for investigating cognitive processes. Topics include response time methods, priming paradigms, tachistoscopic presentation techniques, reading time measurement, and the use of recognition and recall tests. The focus of the course will be on the application of these methods to current theories and issues in cognitive psychology. Laboratories will provide students with first-hand experience at applying these methods to research problems. Prerequisite: PSYCO 258. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 367 Perception =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to theoretical and experimental issues associated with sensory and perceptual experience. Prerequisites: PSYCO 275 or 258. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 371 The Neurobiology of Learning and Memory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to provide students with an introduction to the neural basis of learning and memory. The course begins with a review of the historical background, experimental methods, and principles of neurobiology. Learning and memory are then analyzed at different levels of biological organization, including molecular, cellular, neural circuit, neural system, and behavioral levels. Prerequisite: PSYCO 275. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 372 Behavior in Relation to Genetics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the influence of genetic variations on behavioral differences in infra-human and human populations. Prerequisites: PSYCO 104 or SCI 100 and PSYCO 105 and STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and BIOL 207. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 375 Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Brain basis of human cognition studied using a diverse range of techniques, with a focus on measures of brain activity such as functional neuroimaging and electrophysiology and on experimental findings in neurologically intact participants. Topics include perception, motor control, attention, memory, language, emotion, and development/aging. Prerequisite: PSYCO 275.
PSYCO 377 Human Neuropsychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Brain basis of cognition viewed through the lens of patients with brain damage. Topics include mood, motivation, perception, motor control, attention, memory, language, assessment and rehabilitation. Prerequisite: PSYCO 275. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 381 Principles of Learning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles and processes of learning including a consideration of classical conditioning, instrumental learning, and memory. Research involving non-human animals will be emphasized. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and PSYCO 281 or 282. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 390 Honors Thesis I: Research Apprenticeship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Under the direction of a Faculty member, students pursue a topic of interest leading to the development of a thesis proposal and, during their fourth year, the thesis research. The work normally involves both directed readings and empirical research experience. Restricted to, and required of, third-year students in the Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 391 Evolutionary Theory in Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to evolutionary psychology; the course will examine the application of evolutionary theory to the field of psychology. Prerequisites: two 200-level PSYCO courses.
PSYCO 396 Individual Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A course designed to allow the greater depth than the classroom structure senior undergraduate student the opportunity to pursue a supervised research project in permits. Directed research done under the supervision of an academic member of the Psychology Department. Successful completion of this course requires a formal research proposal or report, lab notes, and/or essay. Normally for students in their third year of study. Cannot be taken more than twice. Prerequisites: a 200-level PSYCO course and consent of the Department. Specific projects may require additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 403 Recent Advances in Experimental Psychology: Models and Theories =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Discussion of advanced concepts and theories developed by selected fields within experimental psychology. The course will examine the relation between theory and data in these fields. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and a 300-level PSYCO course. Students must check with the Department for the topics for the year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 409 Honors Seminar II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 3-0-0). A continuation of PSYCO 309, with an emphasis on the development of professional skills. Topics include the new information technologies, the publication process, ethical issues, and the application of research findings to real-world problems. The seminar meets once a week for the full Fall/Winter period. Prerequisite: PSYCO 309. Restricted to, and required of, fourth-year students in the Science Honors Psychology program. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 413 Design and Analysis of Experiments in Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Provides the background necessary to design and analyze data in any area of experimental psychology and prepares students to conduct original research. Topics include sampling distributions and hypothesis testing; issues in and analysis of between-subjects, within-subjects, and mixed designs; trend analysis; planned and post hoc comparisons; fixed and random effects factors; and efficiency and power of various experimental designs. Prerequisite: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151 and any 300-level PSYCO. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 421 Advanced Topics in Human Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An in-depth review and analysis of research in an area of human development. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151, and PSYCO 323 or PSYCO 327 or PSYCO 329. Note: Consult with the Department for the specific topic offered each year and any additional prerequisites. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 452 Minds and Machines Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Computational models are playing an increasingly important role in cognitive psychology. The purpose of this course is to provide students with the theoretical background for using such models, as well as some hands-on experience. Students will learn about the history of these models in cognitive psychology, how one might characterize good and bad models, and how cognitive psychologists attempt to experimentally validate their models. Prerequisite: PSYCO 354. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 457 Embodied Cognitive Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to theory and practice of embodied cognitive science, focusing on phenomena that emerge from agent-environment, including how even simple agents can produce apparently complex behavior. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151, PSYCO 354 and one other 300-level psychology course. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 458 Advanced Topics in Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In depth examination of one or more topics in cognitive psychology. Topics may include knowledge representation, visual cognition, memory, learning, decision making, language, reasoning and problem-solving. Prerequisites: one of PSYCO 350, 354, 356, 357, or 365. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 459 Human Aging: Cognitive Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the sensory, perceptual, memory, and cognitive changes in normal aging. Topics may include the relationship of psychological, environmental, social and health factors to cognitive processes. Prerequisites: PSYCO 258 and a 300-level Psychology course. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 471 Neurophysiology: Theory, Methods, and Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of theory, methods, and analysis of various neurophysiological techniques utilized in brain-behaviour research. The dynamics of in vivo recordings will be extensively covered. Prerequisites: One of PSYCO 371, 375, 377 or PMCOL 371. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 473 Advanced Topics in Neuroscience =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers in depth examination of one or more topics in neuroscience. Prerequisite: Students must check with the Department website for the topics for the year and any additional prerequisites.
PSYCO 475 Biological Bases of Behavior =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic neuroanatomy and neuropsychology of sensory and motor systems. Prerequisite: PSYCO 371, 375, or 377. Students who have obtained credit in NEURO 375 cannot take PSYCO 475 for credit. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 478 Behavior and Brain Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The influence of environmental and genetic factors on the relationship between chemistry of the brain and the behavior of humans and animals. Prerequisite: PSYCO 371, 375, or 377. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 483 Spatial Cognition and Navigation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The course critically evaluates research and theory in spatial cognition and navigation. Topics may include research from: comparative cognition, developmental psychology, evolution and ecology, human cognition, neuroscience or artificial intelligence. Prerequisites: STAT 141 or 151 or SCI 151, and PSYCO 351 or 381. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 485 Theory in Learning and Comparative Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A theoretical analysis of topics such as Pavlovian conditioning, instrumental learning, working memory, timing, concept learning, and order and numerical competence. Also discussed will be the purposes and nature of theories and the historical development of theory in learning and comparative cognition. Prerequisite: PSYCO 381. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 491 Topics in Evolutionary Theory in Psychology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An in-depth review and analysis of theory and research on specific advanced topics in the field of evolutionary psychology. Prerequisite: PSYCO 391.
PSYCO 494 Human Factors and Ergonomics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Scientific knowledge about human behaviours, abilities, limitations, and other characteristics applied to design and use are examined in a range of contexts, from the operation of everyday things to extraordinary systems failures. Prerequisites: A 300-level PSYCO course. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 496 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). A course designed to allow the senior undergraduate student the opportunity to pursue a research topic in greater depth than the classroom structure permits. This pursuit may take the form of directed reading, library research, and/or laboratory experience. A formal paper, research proposal, research report, annotated bibliography, lab notes, and/or essay is required. Cannot be taken more than twice. Prerequisite: A 300-level psychology course and consent of Department. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 499 Honors Thesis II: Thesis Research Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Under the direction of a faculty member, students conduct an empirical research project culminating in the Honors Thesis. Prerequisite: PSYCO 390. Restricted to, and required of, fourth-year students in the Science Honors psychology program. [Faculty of Science]
Graduate Courses Faculty of Arts Courses
PSYCO 502 Professional and Ethical Issues Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 541 Advanced Social and Cultural Psychology I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 542 Advanced Social and Cultural Psychology II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 600 Individual Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Arts]
PSYCO 622 Topics in Developmental Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Arts]
Faculty of Science Courses
PSYCO 505 Conference Course in Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 521 Developmental Concepts and Theories Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 522 Developmental Methods: Design and Data Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 523 Developmental Methods: Application Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: PSYCO 522 or permission of Instructor. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 531 Design and Analysis in Psychological Research I Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 532 Design and Analysis in Psychological Research II Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-1). Prerequisite: PSYCO 531 or equivalent. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 560 Memory and Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 561 Advanced Learning and Comparative Cognition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 574 Advanced Topics in Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-1.5s-0). [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 576 Cognitive Neuroscience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. [Faculty of Science]
PSYCO 631 Topics in Quantitative Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: PSYCO 532 or permission of Instructor. [Faculty of Science]
#
Punjabi
PUNJ
Department of East Asian Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
PUNJ 111 Beginners’ Punjabi I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Introduction to Punjabi language and culture. Designed for complete beginners of Punjabi. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency or any previous instruction in Punjabi.
PUNJ 112 Beginners’ Punjabi II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Continuation of PUNJ 111. Prerequisite: PUNJ 111 or consent of the Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency. Students who have not taken PUNJ 111 but have some background in Punjabi will be tested the first days of class for eligibility.
PUNJ 211 Intermediate Punjabi I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Intended to consolidate a basic understanding of Punjabi language and culture through building upon basic language skills acquired in PUNJ 111/112. Prerequisite: PUNJ 112 or consent of Department.
PUNJ 212 Intermediate Punjabi II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Continuation of PUNJ 211. Prerequisite: PUNJ 211 or consent of the Department.
#
Radiation Therapy
RADTH
Department of Oncology
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
RADTH 205 Patient Care Principles and Practices Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduces the cancer disease trajectory and examines the principles of: palliative care psychosocial issues and factors affecting oncology patients; patient education; person centered care; and toxicity assessment. Prerequisite: permission of the Department.
RADTH 260 Radiation Therapy Clinical Practicum I Œ6 (fi 12) (Spring/Summer, 30 Hours/week - 6 weeks). Provides an introduction to the patient experience through the radiation therapy planning and treatment trajectory. Enables and requires introductory participation in a variety of clinical environments. Prerequisites: ONCOL 233; 234; 243 and RADTH 205.
RADTH 301 Principles and Practices in Radiation Therapy Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). The principles and practices of radiation therapy will be examined with a focus on the patient and the practitioner as well as technological factors. Prerequisite: RADTH 260.
RADTH 328 Health Care Advocacy and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Examines the role policy plays in health care. It provides an overview of the professional, social, regulatory, national and global trends and issues affecting care delivery and cancer screening and prevention strategies. Codes of ethics, standards and scopes of practice, and national and provincial legislation will be considered. The concepts of informed consent, quality improvement, and best practice will be studied. Prerequisite: RADTH 260.
RADTH 360 Clinical Simulation and Reasoning Œ13 (fi 26) (Spring/Summer, 30 Hours/week - 13 weeks). This course facilitates the integration and application of theoretical knowledge when performing in a simulated clinical setting. While transferring skills across tumour sites and various procedures, students will demonstrate clinical reasoning and decision making in the simulated environment. As well, students will develop key attitudes, judgments and behaviours necessary for a practicing radiation therapist. Prerequisites: RADTH 260, ONCOL 306, 335 and 356.
RADTH 401 Radiation Therapy Research Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Examines a broad scope of research methods and components. Students will examine the action research process; research ethics; clinical trial methods and outcomes; and statistical methods in more depth. Development of a research project proposal and the ethics review process will be started. Prerequisites: RADTH 260 and RADTH 328.
RADTH 460 Radiation Therapy Clinical Practicum II Œ16 (fi 32) (first term, 35 hours in 16 weeks). Involves the progression of application and integration of knowledge gained from all academic course and skills attained in the simulation environment to put into practice in the clinical environment. Skills learned will enable the student to perform safe and accurate treatments and patient interactions under the supervision of qualified healthcare professionals. Students will begin to prepare and conduct a research project that demonstrates: evidence-based inquiry; reflection; critical thinking; analysis of data; synthesis of outcomes and personal practice; and the Ethics Review process. Prerequisite: RADTH 360 and RADTH 401.
RADTH 461 Radiation Therapy Clinical Practicum III Œ20 (fi 40) (second term, 35 hours in 17 weeks). Involves the demonstration of critical thinking, clinical reasoning, effective problem-solving, and competent performance in all areas of entry-level radiation therapy practice. Successful completion of all components is mandatory for eligibility to access the CAMRT national certification examination. Students will continue work on their research report. Upon completion of their report they will present it to the radiation therapy community. Prerequisite: RADTH 460.
#
Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging
RADDI
Department of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Notes
(1) Undergraduate training in radiology is included in ANAT 411; MED 422, 423, 431; and NEURO 421.
(2) See also Oncological (ONCOL) listing.
Graduate Courses
RADDI 511 Physics of Diagnostic Imaging: Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 2-0-1). This course is divided into two main sections: (1) Basic Radiation Physics which deals with nuclear and atomic structure using the Bohr model; Radiation Dose, Risk and Safety from low-level ionizing radiation to Diagnostic Radiology, Radiobiology; and (2) General Radiography: production and clinical use of X-rays; the radiographic image and image parameters; patient radiation/imaging concepts. There will be also a lab component where the student will spend an average of one hour per week in a diagnostic procedure room completing specified imaging tasks/lessons. These labs will not be held at specific times, but will be arranged individually for each student. This course will be offered in alternate years to RADDI 512. Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 475/477 or consent of Department.
RADDI 512 Physics of Diagnostic Imaging: Imaging Modalities Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 2-0-0). This course will build on the curriculum presented in RADDI 511 and will discuss in detail the physics involved in the following imaging modalities: Radiography, Fluoroscopy, Conventional Tomography, Bone Densitometry, Mammography, Computed Tomography (CT), Nuclear Medicine, Ultrasound, and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). This course will be offered in alternate years to RADDI 511. Prerequisites: RADDI 511 or consent of Department.
RADDI 514 Image Processing and Analysis in Diagnostic Imaging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course aims to cover medical image processing and analysis techniques, including de-noising, registration, segmentation, 3D reconstruction, applicable in diagnostic imaging modalities such as ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Clinical examples in cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and brain imaging will be discussed. Prerequisite: Linear algebra and knowledge in MATLAB programming or consent of Department.
RADDI 521 Physics of Nuclear Medicine Imaging Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 2-0-0). This course investigates the physics involved in the field of clinical nuclear medicine imaging. Discussion of basic atomic theory (Bohr model), interaction of radiation with matter, radioactive decay, and production of radionuclides will be followed with assessment of radiation detection instrumentation (geiger counters, ionization detectors, gamma cameras). PET and SPECT performance and image quality parameters will be emphasized, along with NEMA standards for QA and AT. Calculation methodology for Internal Dosimetry will be presented, followed by a discussion of radiobiology. Prerequisite or Corequisites: Normally restricted to students in Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging. This course will also be offered to students, residents and fellows enrolled in the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. RADDI 511/512 or consent of the Department.
#
Recreation and Leisure Studies
RLS
Faculty of Physical Education and Recreation
Notes
(1) See also INT D listings for courses which are offered by more than one department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
(2) Priority will be given to recreation students in all recreation courses that are required for the BA (Recreation, Sport, and Tourism) degree program.
(3) All out-of-Faculty students are recommended to complete RLS 100 in order to take any other recreation course.
(4) Where an appropriate background can be demonstrated, prerequisites may be waived, with the consent of the Faculty.
Undergraduate Courses
RLS 100 Life, Leisure, and the Pursuit of Happiness =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of the nature, characteristics, and functions of leisure in modern Canada. Review of relationships between leisure and time, play, work, family, education, ethnicity, gender, and environment. Discussion of ideas about conventional leisure, serious leisure, and deviant leisure. Overview of the structure of the Canadian recreation and tourism delivery systems.
RLS 122 Leadership in Recreation and Leisure Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to leadership and followership as they apply to recreation and leisure organizations. Emphasis is on practical skills including oral and written communication, group dynamics, conflict management, organizational ethics and politics, progressional careers, and other topics as relevant.
RLS 130 Collaborative Skills and Processes for Community Recreation and Leisure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1.5). Study of the social and political processes through which groups and individuals work to mobilize resources and establish relationships to fulfill individual and community recreation/leisure needs. Basic personal communication and conflict skills for understanding, analyzing, and working through social and political processes will be examined. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 130 or 230. Prerequisite: RLS 100.
RLS 210 Recreation and Leisure Scholarship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course will examine systematic processes of recreation and leisure scholarship. Topics may include the nature of inquiry, paradigmatic questions, quantitative and qualitative methodologies, evaluation and applied research, and other topics as relevant to the areas of recreation and leisure. Prerequisite: RLS 100.
RLS 223 Leisure and Human Behavior Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A sociopsychological examination of leisure experiences and leisure behaviors. Focus is on the individual in dynamic interactions with other individuals, groups or cultures within a leisure context. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 123 or 223.
RLS 225 Program Planning for Leisure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course involves an examination of the planning process with a particular focus on programming for recreation, sport and tourism. Consideration will be given to program planning for leisure in the context of the not-for-profit, commercial and public sectors. Prerequisite: RLS 100.
RLS 232 Marketing for Recreation, Sport and Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Marketing is examined from the unique perspectives of recreation, sport and tourism. Emphasis is placed on marketing in the not-for- profit sector although commercial perspectives are also considered. Major topics include market positioning, research, segmentation, product, price, distribution, and promotion. This course will normally include a field experience component. Prerequisite: PERLS 105.
RLS 263 Principles of Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course presents an overview and explores the basic principles of the tourism system (tourist, travel, destinations, and marketing), underlying influences such as cultural, social, economic, and psychological aspects, areas of major tourist activity such as natural spaces, constructed facilities, and cultural events, and the impact of tourism upon the attraction, local communities, and national arenas. NOTE: Field Trips are an integral and required component of this Course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
RLS 325 Public Policy in Recreation, Sport and Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course develops a critical understanding of public policy and governance in relation to sport, recreation and tourism. It is intended to help students to understand the rationale for public policy, the processes that form it, the governance context in which it is created and implemented, and its implications for the delivery of recreation, sport and tourism. Prerequisites: RLS 100 or PERLS 105.
RLS 331 Leisure Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A total development process through which individuals develop an understanding of self, leisure, and the relationship of leisure to their own lifestyles and the fabric of society. Examination of determining the place and significance leisure has in one’s life. Prerequisite: RLS 100.
RLS 335 Human Resources Management in Recreation, Sport and Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the role played by human resource management in the facilitation and delivery of recreation, sport and tourism programs. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 335 or PERLS 335. Prerequisites PERLS 105, RLS 122 recommended.
RLS 370 Assessment in Therapeutic Recreation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). An overview of basic assessment principles is presented and applied to develop competence in the selection of appropriate assessment tools, modification of existing tools, and development of specialized tools, to systematically collect comprehensive and accurate data. Analysis and interpretation of the data collected to determine an individualized program plan, and appropriate documentation, are also addressed. Prerequisites: PERLS 371 and PEDS 209 or RLS 210. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 370 or PERLS 370.
RLS 400 Philosophies of Leisure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines selected philosophical perspectives related to leisure, recreation, work, play, and quality of life. The course explores the philosophical implications for the recreation profession in Canada and issues related to the future of leisure in Canadian society. Note: Credit will be granted for only one of RLS 300 or 400.
RLS 441 Practicum Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar, taken concurrently with RLS 449, which seeks to relate the professional work experience to the academic and professional preparation elements within the BA program. Students will not be allowed to register in any other course concurrently with RLS 441/449 unless approved by the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor.
RLS 449 Professional Practicum Œ12 (fi 24) (either term, 14 weeks). Fourteen weeks of professional experience in full-time, unpaid placement (35 to 40 hours per week). Students must arrange placements through the Practicum Supervisor/Instructor. Must be taken concurrently with RLS 441. Students will not be allowed to register in any other course in conjunction with RLS 441/449 unless approved by the Practicum Supervisor/ Instructor.
RLS 452 Parks Planning, Management, and Maintenance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of parks as recreation environments together with an analysis of the relationship between park planning, design and subsequent management and maintenance in terms of meeting the requirements of the park agency, the park user and the resource base. Attention is focused on both the common themes in park management and the specific problems of parks operation and maintenance associated with particular types of parks contained within a comprehensive park system. Note: Field Trips are an integral and required component of this course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: Completion of *60.
RLS 463 Issues in Tourism Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical issues in tourism development will be examined within the context of tourism transformation models and fundamental development concepts such as commodification, authenticity, globalization, sense of place, economic impact, socio-cultural impact and environmental impact. NOTE: Field Trips are an integral and required component of this course. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: RLS 263.
RLS 465 Natural Area Tourism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the different types of tourism that can occur in natural areas (e.g. adventure, nature based, wildlife, ecotourism) from the perspective of tourists, trip organizers and guides, planners and managers, local residents, and indigenous people. Prerequisite: RLS 263.
RLS 473 Principles and Processes in Therapeutic Recreation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). The therapeutic recreation programming process is emphasized. Primary focus is on specialized programs in therapeutic recreation settings. The relationship between therapeutic recreation services and recreation and special populations is addressed. Therapeutic recreation service methods, such as systems approach programming, activity analysis, leisure assessment techniques and instruments, as well as treatment approaches and facilitation strategies employed in therapeutic recreation settings are presented. Professional issues such as client rights, standards of practice, and credentialing will also be addressed. Prerequisite: PERLS 207.
RLS 497 Selected Topics in Recreation and Leisure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). Topics of current interest in leisure and recreation. These may vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
RLS 499 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A course designed to meet the needs of individual students. Prerequisite: Consent of Faculty.
Graduate Courses
RLS 510 Concepts and Theories of Leisure and Recreation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Concepts, theories, and perspectives of leisure and recreation are examined in relation to the psychological, sociological, cultural, political, and global significance of leisure. Practical implications will also be explored.
RLS 531 Socio-Psychological Dimensions of Leisure Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A social psychological examination of leisure behaviour research and theory, including motivations for, constraints to, experiences during, benefits from, and costs of, leisure.
RLS 541 Parks and Protected Areas: Planning and Management of Natural and Cultural Heritage. Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An interdisciplinary perspective on policy, planning, and management issues associated with parks, protected areas, and the stewardship of natural and cultural heritage. Current issues facing conservation and outdoor recreation agencies will be emphasized. The provision and management of outdoor recreation opportunities within protected areas is also examined. Prerequisite: RLS 225, or permission of the instructor. Note: additional fees related to Field Trip expenses are anticipated.
#
Rehabilitation Medicine
REHAB
Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Note: Normally all REHAB courses are restricted to students in Rehabilitation Medicine. Students from other faculties require consent of the instructor offering the course.
Graduate Courses
REHAB 500 Conducting Rehabilitation Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of a plan to conduct research including writing a proposal. Students will discuss critically various aspects, such as the selection of the problem, the review of the literature, the research hypothesis, the collection and analysis of the data, and the significance of the research. Sections may be offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REHAB 512 Issues in Rehabilitation Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course will provide an orientation to the theoretical base and application of Rehabilitation Science.
REHAB 535 The Nature of Pain Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Pain is a major factor impacting quality of life and will continue to become more so as the average lifespan increases. Understanding the multi-dimensional nature of pain and its broad impact is critical to applying best practice in its assessment and treatment. This course will explore the neuroscience and physiology of various pain conditions, with application assessment and management principles. A range of theoretical perspectives underlying the individual’s experience of pain across the continuum from acute to complex/chronic will be presented. The need for interprofessional collaboration for pain management will be introduced. (This course is a prerequisite for REHAB 536 and REHAB 537.)
REHAB 536 Assessment and Management of Pain Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will explore how pain is assessed, quantified, and communicated, in addition to how the individual, the health system and society affect these activities. Building on foundations developed in Rehab 535, this course will present models of and approaches to assessment of and treatment for common pain conditions across the lifespan, with an emphasis on complex/chronic pain. Rationale for pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions will be reviewed in the context of assessment and outcome assessment. Participants will discuss best practice roles and evidence- based roles and interventions for each of the health professionals involved in the collaborative interprofessional assessment and management of chronic pain. Prerequisite: REHAB 535.
REHAB 537 Integrating and Implementing Pain Management Models Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will provide an opportunity for students to integrate and apply information presented in REHAB 535 and 536 using standardized assignments with real and/or simulated patients as a base from which to develop an evidence-based, collaborative, interprofessional, assessment and treatment program of chronic pain and disability. Pre-requisite: REHAB 535, 536.
REHAB 540 Stroke Rehabilitation: Best Practice and Critical Review of the Evidence Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will focus on current knowledge of best practice in the area of stroke, as well as provide students with critical appraisal skills that will sustain and further the acquisition of best practice information and principles in stroke rehabilitation. This evidence and best practice will be explored in the context of the stroke survivor, caregivers and rehabilitation professionals with students having an opportunity to apply learning to specific professional areas of interest.
REHAB 541 The Stroke Survivor: Assessment and Rehabilitation across the Continuum of Care Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). The goal of this course is to integrate and apply advanced knowledge from REHAB 540 into clinical practice. Using a discovery learning/case study approach, students will conduct an evidence-based review of the literature and work as an interdisciplinary team to apply best practice information to a variety of care contexts. Students will work collaboratively on case studies that offer practical opportunities to apply assessment and treatment principles. Additionally, the course will explore team functioning and dynamics within and across the various stroke rehabilitation settings with students having an opportunity to apply learning to specific professional areas of practice. Prerequisite: REHAB 540.
REHAB 542 Advancing Practice in Stroke Rehabilitation Œ3 (fi 15) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). The goal of this course is to develop a proposal that could be implemented into a work environment that incorporates advanced/best practices in stroke rehabilitation. Students will choose a project based on the knowledge gained in the previous courses and on needs that they identify within a practice setting. Students will gain knowledge and experience in organizational change management while working collaboratively with a host site. Students will gain skills in the area they choose for their proposal through tailored mentoring. The mentor will facilitate the process of moving evidence into practice by providing content expertise in implementation of best practice in stroke rehabilitation in a clinical setting. Additionally, this process is expected to provide students with valuable professional contacts. Prerequisite: REHAB 541.
REHAB 543 Sexual Health: Issues and Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will provide the students with an understanding of sexuality from a personal, familial, societal, cultural and ethical perspective. The course will provide an overview of basic anatomy, physiology, psychosocial, lifespan and sexual health issues. The impact of disability and illness on sexual identity and functioning as well as specific sexual dysfunctions will also be covered. This course will present strategies and skills service providers can use when dealing with sexual health issues. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
REHAB 544 Sexual Health Education Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This introductory course will provide students with an understanding of sexual health education philosophy, instructional techniques and an appreciation of the common challenges associated with comprehensive sexual health education. The impact of personal bias will be explored with respect to differing cultures, lifestyles and values. The course will focus on practical implementation of tools and skills for the service professional based on current evidence in the literature. Prerequisite: REHAB 543. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
REHAB 545 Sexuality: Illness and Disability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will provide the students with an understanding physical and mental changes associated with an illness, injury or disability as it affects sexual health adjustment. The course will provide an overview of sexuality in terms of basic anatomy, physiology, and sexual health issues as it relates to disability. The impact of disability and illness on sexual identity and functioning as well as specific sexual dysfunctions will also be covered. This course will also provide practical guidelines for dealing with specific sexual health concerns expressed by clients and their partners. Prerequisite: REHAB 544. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
REHAB 546 Sex Positivity: In Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course will give students a better understanding of the importance of using a sex-positive approach with clients. The course will explore what shapes an individual’s sexual morals, values, and beliefs. The impact of religion, culture, media, and the law on sexuality will be emphasized. This course will help students become more aware of their sexual attitudes and offer strategies to become more effective sexual health practitioners. Prerequisite: REHAB 544. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students.
REHAB 560 Le bilinguisme en milieu clinique et éducatif : enjeux linguistiques, culturels et sociaux Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre ou printemps/été, 3-0-0). Ce cours a comme objectif de développer les connaissances en ce qui a trait au bilinguisme, particulièrement dans le contexte canadien, affectant l’intervention auprès des enfants et des adultes. Les liens entre le bilinguisme et les enjeux culturels et sociaux seront aussi abordés. Ce cours s’adresse surtout aux professionnels etétudiants des domaines tells que l’orthophonie, la psychologie, le travail social, l’éducation et la linguistique. Ceux qui ne sont pas inscris au programme MScSLP peuvent s’inscrire avec la permission du Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders. REHAB 560 est offert en français. Tous les étudiants doivent pouvoir communiquer oralement et par écrit en français.
REHAB 561 Développement de la parole, évaluation et intervention en milieu francophone Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). L’objectif de ce cours est de présenter le développement de la parole chez les enfants francophones, particulièrement ceux en contexte minoritaire, et l’évaluation et l’intervention des troubles de la parole, avec une emphase sur les enfants ayant ces troubles. Le cours comprend dix heures de laboratoire clinique auprès des clients francophones. Le cours est réservé aux étudiants de la maitrise en orthophonie et aux orthophonistes en exercice. REHAB 561 est offert en français. Tous les étudiants doivent pouvoir communiquer oralement et par écrit en français. Ce cours peut comprendre une section Alternative Delivery: veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire. Prérequis: REHAB 560/553. Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour REHAB 551.
REHAB 562 Développement du langage, évaluation et intervention en milieu francophone Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 0-3L-0). Le cours comporte une étude approfondie du développement langagier typique chez les enfants monolingues et bilingues apprenant le français ainsi que de la manifestation du trouble du langage chez les enfants francophones. Le cours porte également sur les outils d’évaluation et les modèles d’intervention appropriés aux enfants francophones atteints de troubles du langage. Une attention particulière sera portée sur l’apprentissage du français en contexte linguistique minoritaire. Comprend dix heures d’expérience clinique avec des clients francophones. Le cours est réservé aux étudiants de la maitrise en orthophonie et aux orthophonistes en exercice. REHAB 562 est offert en français. Tous les étudiants doivent pouvoir communiquer oralement et par écrit en français. Ce cours peut comprendre une section Alternative Delivery: veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guidedans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire. Prérequis : REHAB 560/553). Ce cours n’est pas accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour REHAB 552.
REHAB 563 Developpement de la lecture et de l’ecriture, evaluation et intervention en milieu francophone Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre ou printemps/été, 0-3L-0). Le cours porte sur l’apprentissage de la lecture et de l’orthographe en français et des troubles qui y sont associés. Ce cours abordera les outils de dépistage, d’évaluation ainsi que les programmes probants d’intervention auprès d’enfants francophones présentant un trouble du langage écrit. Une attention particulière sera portée sur l’apprentissage du langage écrit dans un contexte linguistique minoritaire. REHAB 563 est offert en ligne et comprend dix heures de laboratoire pratique auprès d’enfants francophones. Les professionnels et étudiants des domaines tels que l’orthophonie, la psychologie, le travail social, l’éducation et la linguistique peuvent, avec la permission du Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, aussi s’inscrire à ce cours. REHAB 563 est offert en français. Tous les étudiants doivent pouvoir communiquer oralement et par écrit en français. Cours Alternative Delivery: veuillez consulter le Fees Payment Guide dans la section University Regulations and Information for Students de l’annuaire. Ce cours est accessible aux étudiants ayant ou postulant des crédits pour REHAB 560/553 et les étudiants ayant la permission du Department of Communication Sciences and Disorder.
REHAB 570 Diagnostic Imaging in Physical Therapy Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). This course is intended to provide students with an overview of diagnostic imaging and how it can be effectively utilized for conditions that are commonly seen in physical therapy practice. Case management strategies, clinical guidelines for ordering and utilizing ionizing and non ionizing imaging modalities, issues of patient safety and risk, and integration of imaging information into physical therapy care will be included. Prerequisite: diploma, undergraduate or graduate degree in Physical Therapy. Note: Registration by consent of the Faculty. This is an approved cost recovery course. Not open to students with credit in PTHER 410.
REHAB 599 Directed Individual Reading and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). May be repeated. Open to graduate students in Master’s and PhD degree programs in the Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine or any of the other health sciences Faculties who wish to pursue individual reading and research studies with an academic staff member within the Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine. Prerequisites: consent of student’s graduate supervisor and instructor of record.
REHAB 600 Theory and Issues in Rehabilitation Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The course will provide an orientation to the theoretical base of rehabilitation science and its historical development. Students will critically examine existing theory and compare the theoretical base of rehabilitation science to other health related fields. Methods of theory development will be addressed, as well as a variety of ways of testing theoretical approaches. Students will study the field of rehabilitation science through selected readings, discussion, and research seminars.
REHAB 601 Research Design in Rehabilitation Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An orientation to the unique features of rehabilitation science that impact on research methodology, design, ethical issues, measurement, and statistical analyses. Issues such as chronicity of disease, low incidence of specific conditions resulting in small sample sizes, small increments of change over long periods of time, ordinal data, wide variability in patient characteristics, group data versus single subject data, etc. will be studied in terms of appropriate research design, measurement, and analyses.
REHAB 603 Seminars in Rehabilitation Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar is designed to allow students in the doctoral program to learn more about the scope of research in rehabilitation science. Students attend a weekly seminar presented by staff and graduate students in the Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine and other health science faculties. Students registered in the PhD program in Rehabilitation Science must enrol in this seminar within the first two years of their doctoral programs and must present at least one seminar.
REHAB 899 Directed Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). May be repeated once. Restricted to students in the PhD program in Rehabilitation Science who did not write a master’s thesis and for whom an in-lieu-of thesis experience is required in the plan of study. Prerequisite: Recommendation of PhD supervisor.
#
Religious Studies
RELIG
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Note: See the following sections for listings of other Office of Interdisciplinary programs. Comparative Literature (C LIT); Humanities Computing (HUCO); Interdisciplinary (INT D) Faculty of Arts Courses; Middle Eastern and African Studies (MEAS); Science, Technology and Society (STS); and Writing Studies (WRS).
Undergraduate Courses
RELIG 102 Introduction to Western Religious Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the major religious traditions originating in West Asia, including, but not limited to, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Note: not open to students with credit in RELIG 101.
RELIG 103 Introduction to Eastern Religious Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the major religious traditions originating in South and East Asia, including, but not limited to, Buddhism, Hinduism, Daoism, Confucianism, and Shinto. Note: not open to students with credit in RELIG 101.
RELIG 200 Classical Theories of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the history of Religious Studies; introduction to classical theories and main disciplinary approaches. Required for Honors, Majors, and Minors.
RELIG 202 Introduction to Old Testament/Hebrew Bible Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the critical study of the Old Testament/Hebrew Bible.
RELIG 205 Introduction to Judaism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the varied world of Judaism: its ways of life, beliefs, history and thought.
RELIG 211 Introduction to Early Christian Writings Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical introduction to the New Testament and other early Christian Writings in their historical cultural context.
RELIG 212 Christian Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the Christian traditions in historical context. Note: Not open to students with credit in HIST 297 or ET RE 248.
RELIG 220 Introducing Islam, from Prophetic Origins to World Tradition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the main elements of the Muslim tradition and their role in the formation of Islamic culture. Note: Not open to students with credit in RELIG 221.
RELIG 230 Introduction to Hinduism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the major traditions of classical Hinduism, and of the religious thinking and experience formed through these traditions.
RELIG 239 Introduction to Sanskrit I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Fundamentals of the Sanskrit language for reading and translation purposes. Designed for students with no previous knowledge of Sanskrit.
RELIG 240 Introduction to Buddhism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the emergence of Buddhism as a religion, its basic ideas, spirituality, and literature.
RELIG 274 Studies in Witchcraft and the Occult Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
RELIG 277 Women and the Conflict of Ideas in Religious Traditions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of the agency of women within selected religious traditions, examining their contributions to their own faith tradition and to broader historical and sociopolitical contexts.
RELIG 307 The Kabbalah Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Studies in Jewish mysticism from the earliest period to modern times. Note: Not open to students with credit in RELIG 340.
RELIG 308 From Cyrus to Jesus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Religion, society and culture in Palestine from the Persian conquest to the time of Jesus. Note: Not open to students with credit in CLASS 380.
RELIG 314 Jesus Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of representations of Jesus in various historical and social contexts.
RELIG 320 Qur’anic Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the style, structure, and doctrine of the Qur’an in the light of the Western critical evaluation of the text. Note: Not open to students with credit in RELIG 327.
RELIG 331 Devotional Hinduism (bhakti) Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the various strands of devotional and mystical Hinduism (such as Vishnuism, Shivaism, Shaktism).
RELIG 343 Zen/Chan Buddhism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the history of Zen/Chan Buddhism in China and Japan in terms of the major movements, their main figures, and samples of the representative texts. Prerequisite: RELIG 240 or EASIA 223, or consent of Instructor.
RELIG 397 Special Topics in Religious Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 404 Literary Studies in Old Testament/Hebrew Bible Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: One course in Old Testament/Hebrew Bible or consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 415 Advanced Studies in Christianity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: one course in Christianity or consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 422 Advanced Studies in Islam Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: one course in Islam or consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 432 Advanced Studies in Hinduism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Detailed studies of particular texts, practices, and traditions within Hinduism. Prerequisite: one course in Hinduism or consent of program.
RELIG 442 Advanced Studies in Buddhism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: one course in Buddhism or consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 475 Contemporary Theories of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theories and disciplinary approaches in the study of religion, religions, and religious practices. Required for Honors and Majors. Prerequisite: consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 480 Directed Reading in Religious Studies =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Program Coordinator.
RELIG 497 Special Topics in Religious Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 499 Honors Essay in Religious Studies Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Preparation of the Honors essay. Formerly RELIG 501.
Graduate Courses
RELIG 504 Literary Studies in the Old Testament/Hebrew Bible =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 510 Selected Topics in Religious Studies =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 516 Special Topics in Early Christianity =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 520 Specialized Studies in Islam Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An in-depth study of the problems of Islamic Studies.
RELIG 542 Advanced Studies in Buddhism Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 575 Contemporary Theories of Religion =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RELIG 580 Directed Reading Course I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
RELIG 581 Directed Reading Course II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
RELIG 675 Graduate Seminar =OPEN-LIMITED Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This is a pass/fail course.
#
Renewable Resources
REN R
Department of Renewable Resources
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Note: See also Agricultural and Resource Economics (AREC), Animal Science (AN SC), Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS), Forest Economics (FOREC), Plant Science (PL SC) listings for related courses.
The following courses were renumbered:
Old New
REN R 485 REN R 495
REN R 575 REN R 595
Undergraduate Courses
REN R 100 Forests: Ecology, Use and Society =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An introduction to forest trees, plants, insects, fungi, fire, biodiversity and ecology. Discusses the use of forests for wood products recreation, watersheds, wildlife, carbon, and overall management and policies in Alberta and elsewhere. Not available for credit to BSc Forestry or BSc Forest Business Management students. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 100 or FOR 100.
REN R 101 Introductory Forestry Field School =OPEN-LIMITED Œ0 (fi 3) (first term, 6 days). A general overview of the practice of Forestry. This orientation includes an introduction to basic forest measurements, forest management practices, and will include tours of a number of major forest operations in Alberta. Course runs for six days just prior to Fall registration. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 101 or FOR 101.
REN R 110 Natural Resource Measurement =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-2). Designed to introduce students to the principles and practices of measuring timber, water, range, wildlife, biodiversity and recreation.
REN R 120 Introduction to Plant Identification =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-4). Introduction to the classification, identification, distribution, habitat, and ecology of common trees, shrubs and herbaceous species typically found in Alberta and beyond. Lecture and labs emphasize the recognition of identifying characteristics and the use of dichotomous keys to identify about 250 plant species including higher taxa. A self-directed plant collection is mandatory and registered students are encouraged to contact the instructor during the summer months for instructions. Field exercises may take place off campus. This course requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REN R 201 Introduction to Geomatic Techniques in Natural Resource Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Methods and applications of geographic information systems (GIS), including global positioning systems (GPS), photogrammetry, air photo interpretation and LIDAR, as they relate to natural resource management. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 201 and EAS 221.
REN R 205 Wildlife Biodiversity and Ecology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Introduction to animals in the context of conservation, interactions with people, and roles in natural ecosystems. Labs provide a survey of North American animal life, both vertebrate and invertebrate, with emphasis on recognition of higher taxa and on hierarchical classification. Field trip. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 205 or ENCS 201. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REN R 210 Introduction to Soil Science and Soil Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Elementary aspects of soil formation, soil occurrence in natural landscapes, soil classification, soil resource inventory; basic morphological, biological, chemical, and physical characteristics employed in the identification of soils and predictions of their performance in both managed and natural landscapes. Prerequisite: Must have completed a university-level course in life or natural sciences. A university-level chemistry course is strongly recommended. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 210 or SOILS 210.
REN R 215 Forest Measurements =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Principles and practices of measuring and estimating present and future fibre production of forest communities, including applications of statistics, sampling techniques, regression analysis, and computer programming. Prerequisites: MATH 113 or 114, and *3 of statistics. Co-requisite: REN R 110. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 215 or FOR 210. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REN R 250 Water Resource Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Global perspective of supply of and demand for water, basic hydrologic principles, concepts in water management, human intervention in the hydrologic cycle, and environmental issues related to this intervention. Prerequisite: *30 at the university level with at least *6 in the life or natural sciences.
REN R 260 History and Fundamentals of Environmental Protection and Conservation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A philosophical and sociological exploration of historical and contemporary perspectives on human-environmental relationships and their implications. Explores these perspectives in a framework of critical thinking and through case studies. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 260 or ENCS 260.
REN R 299 Environmental and Conservation Sciences and Forestry Field School =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3 weeks). Combines the concepts, theories and practices of environmental, conservation and forest sciences in an off-campus field experience. Field skill proficiency in planning, measurement, analysis and reporting is emphasized for biophysical and socioeconomic components of the environment. Prerequisites: *45 university credit and REN R 110. (REN R 210 or SOILS 210) and a plant identification course are strongly recommended. Students must complete this course prior to completion of the final *30 of their program. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Consent of Instructor is required for students outside the Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences. Credit may not be obtained in this course if previous credit has been obtained for ENCS 207 or FOR 302/303/304.
REN R 301 Topics in Renewable Resource Œ3-6 (variable) (either term, variable). Directed study in the multiple aspects of renewable resources. Open to second year (or higher) students upon consent of instructor.
REN R 307 Environmental Assessment Principles and Methods =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles and elements of environmental assessment with an interdisciplinary focus. Topics include types of environmental assessments and when to use them, the Alberta and Canadian environmental assessment processes, the relevant legal framework, sampling and pathways of effects for different biophysical components, mitigation of environmental impacts and assessment of risk. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 307 or ENCS 307. Prerequisites: PL SC 221, REN R 205, 210, 299, and 350. Consent of instructor required for students outside the Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences.
REN R 314 Forest Soils =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Chemical, physical, and biological properties and processes of soil in relation to site and the growth of forest vegetation; nutrient cycling; influences of surface soil erosion, fertilization, and fire upon forest soil productivity: forest land classification. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 314 or FOR 314.
REN R 321 Tree Physiology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Study of physiological processes in trees. Emphasis on primary and secondary metabolism, gas exchange, transport processes, growth, and environmental effects. *3 Chemistry and one of BIOL 107 or PL SC 221 are strongly recommended.
REN R 322 Forest Ecosystems =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Exploration of key concepts regarding the ecology of forest ecosystems at varying temporal and spatial scales. Emphasis will be on relationships between biotic and abiotic components of the ecosystem. Topics covered will include flows of energy and matter, ecosystem dynamics, forest landscapes and biodiversity, impacts of natural and anthropogenic disturbance forest conservation and ecosystem management. Lab exercises during the first month are held outside. The course is taught using a blended learning approach. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: BIOL 208 or consent of instructor. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 322 or FOR 322.
REN R 323 Silviculture =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Forest regeneration principles and techniques; stand tending including fertilization, thinning, pruning and drainage; harvesting systems for reforestation; nursery practices; reforestation, the law and current practices. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: BIOL 208 or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 323 or FOR 323.
REN R 327 The Mosses of Alberta: Conservation and Identification =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This is an introduction to identification and conservation of the mosses of Alberta, with a strong emphasis on field identification. Students are introduced to the morphological characters used to identify Alberta mosses, with supplementary information about individual species’ habitat affinities and distribution within Alberta. Lecture topics include basic morphology, conservation and management of species diversity, and rare/endangered species found within Alberta. Students learn to identify more than 110 species from the province’s six major natural regions. Prerequisites, PLSC 221 or BIOL 208, or consent of instructor.
REN R 333 Wetland Sciences and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). The course includes an introduction to the hydrology, biogeochemistry and ecology of wetland ecosystems. Topics covered include wetland classifications, geomorphic settings, distributions, functions and ecosystem services. Human use, alteration and management of wetlands are examined. An emphasis is placed on wetlands and wetland management in Western Canada, including boreal peatlands and prairie marshes. A full day field trip on a Saturday is required. Prerequisite: BIOL 208 or EAS 201, or consent of instructor. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 333 and BIOL 333.
REN R 335 Forest Harvesting and Transport =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Harvesting and transportation methods and technologies as applied to wood-harvesting operations. This is a general course for students who desire a basic knowledge of current technologies used to conduct forest operations. Offered in alternate years, commencing in 2015. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 335 or FOREN 335. Prerequisite: *60. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 335 or FOREN 335.
REN R 340 Wildland Fire Science and Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles of forest fire science and management in Canadian forest ecosystems. Fire science fundamentals and their applications for addressing complex social, ecological and economic fire management challenges. Topics include fire as a natural disturbance process, mechanisms of fire ignition and spread, fire weather, fire behaviour, and fire occurrence prediction. Models, systems, analytical techniques and policies used to support fire management operations and decisions are explored in relation to contemporary fire management issues. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 340 or FOR 340.
REN R 345 Wood Science and Utilization =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The anatomy and identification of woods; biological, chemical, and physical properties of wood and its components. Lumber, pulp and paper, and reconstituted wood products technologies. Concept of integrated utilization. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 345 or FOREN 355.
REN R 350 Physical Hydrology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Principles of physical and land-use hydrology. The interaction of vegetation, soils, and storage processes with physiography and climate in regulation of hydrologic processes and hydrologic response of watersheds including effects of disturbance on these functions. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210 or written consent of Instructor.
REN R 360 Soil and Water Conservation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Global soil and water resources and their current rates of degradation. The main processes of degradation (erosion, loss of organic matter, salinization, pollution) and their causes. Consequences of degradation and conservation of resources through improved land use practices. Prerequisites: (REN R 210 or SOILS 210) and REN R 250. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 360 or ENCS 360.
REN R 364 Principles of Managing Natural Diversity =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-2). Introduction to the theoretical foundation for conservation science. Elements of population, community and landscape ecology will be reviewed, and their application to real-world challenges discussed. Objective is to provide students with the scientific tools to evaluate and develop conservation strategies for maintaining diversity in human-altered systems. Ethical and philosophical aspects of the sociopolitical arena in which conservation decisions are made and implemented are also explored. Prerequisites: BIOL 208 or (BIOL 108 and REN R 110) and *60 of university-level coursework. Credit will only be given for both REN R 364 and (ENCS 364 or BIOL 367). This course has limited enrolment, with preference given to students in the Conservation Biology major of the ENCS Program.
REN R 365 Ecology of Northern Landscapes Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A study of landscape properties - pattern, process and scale - and their relationship to broad-scale ecological and environmental issues in northern systems. Prerequisite: REN R 364 or ENCS 364. Registration requires enrolment in the BSc Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS) Northern Systems Major, or consent of Department.
REN R 366 Restoration Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles and practices of restoring ecosystem structure, function and biodiversity after natural or anthropogenic disturbances. The course focuses on ecological theory and how to apply it to ecological restoration. Topics include landscape processes and connectivity, soil-plant processes, techniques, philosophy and ethics and societal aspects of ecological restoration. Prerequisite: BIOL 208.
REN R 368 Management and Utilization of Forest Genetic Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Basic principles in plant genetics and resource utilization including tree improvement and reclamation will be covered. Regular lectures will be supplemented with guest lectures and one lab exercise or field trip per month, an individual term report and a group project presentation/poster will be assigned. Prerequisite: *30 university credit.
REN R 376 Fisheries and Wildlife Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of ecology as applied to the management of fisheries and wildlife communities. Topics include the growth and regulation of populations, interactions among species and their environments, tools and techniques used to assess and manage fisheries and wildlife. Special emphasis will be placed applying knowledge using case studies and class exercises to demonstrate key principles. Prerequisite: BIOL 208. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 376 or ENCS 376.
REN R 401 Topics in Renewable Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3-6 (variable) (either term, variable). Directed study in the multiple aspects of renewable resources. Open to third or fourth year students upon consent of instructor. Some sections require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REN R 402 Directed Research in Renewable Resources Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, variable). Directed research, with the intent of preparing the student for graduate studies. Generally undertaken in the fourth year of study, over the course of the fall and winter terms and results in an undergraduate “thesis”. Students wishing to enrol must obtain permission from an instructor, as well as the Associate Chair, Undergraduate, Department of Renewable Resources. Prerequisite: *60 and consent of instructor.
REN R 405 Intermediate Forest Problems =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study. Problems in specialized areas of forest science. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
REN R 414 Agroforestry Systems =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles, complexity, and diversity of agroforestry. Classification of agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems in North America, specifically Canada. Plant and soil aspects of and interactions among the components in agroforestry systems. Use of agroforestry systems to enhance land productivity and sustainability. Socioeconomic aspects of agroforestry. Prerequisite: 60 units of university courses.
REN R 421 Advanced Tree Physiology =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Stress physiology of trees and tree seedlings; mechanisms of stress action and stress resistance; effects of silvicultural practices on growth and physiology; planting stress. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
REN R 423 Advanced Silviculture =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Readings, discussions and exercises on current topics in silviculture. Possible topics include: forest microsites, forest competition, plantation forestry, partial-cut systems, or intensive management. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: REN R 323 or FOR 323. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 423 or FOR 423.
REN R 426 Geographical Information Systems Applications in Renewable Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). This course is a combination of lecture/lab and directed studies to develop advanced GIS skills. A focus of the course is an individual spatial analysis project. Prerequisites: EAS 221, FOREN 201 or REN R 201, or consent of instructor.
REN R 427 Science Policy and Canada’s North Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to expose students to key themes in science policy in the Canadian North, and to prepare students for careers at the northern science-policy interface. Case studies from the Canadian North will be used to explore the main themes of the course. Offered at Yukon College only. Prerequisite: *60.
REN R 430 Forest Resources Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Analytical techniques used by renewable resource managers for management of wildland areas for single or multiple outputs; problems of defining optimality when confronted with competing uses and multiple outputs. Prerequisite: *54 of University credit.
REN R 431 Integrated Forest Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Problem solving, decision making and planning in relation to the management of forest resources. Application of models and related tools. Public involvement and issues management will be addressed. Prerequisite: REN R 299 (or FOR 302, 303, 304) and (REN R 323 or FOR 323) and REN R 430. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 431 or FOR 431.
REN R 440 Disturbance Ecology Fundamentals =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). This course will cover various aspects of disturbance ecology, including concepts of disturbance frequency, severity, intensity; ecological resilience and resistance and ecosystem responses to and recovery from disturbance. Students will define what a disturbance is and critically evaluate disturbance types and their characteristics in different ecosystems and their implications for conservation, sustainability of ecosystems, and application to reclamation / restoration. Prerequisites: *60 and BIOL 208.
REN R 441 Soil Formation and Landscape Processes =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Soil formation, with emphasis on landscape processes as factors in soil development; pedogenic processes and their relation to environmental issues; soils; vegetation, and geological associations; kinds and distribution of soils in Canada; soil classification; field examination and computer-assisted learning of soils and their landscape. Field trips. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210 or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 441 or SOILS 420.
REN R 442 Soil Biogeochemistry =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the main components of the soil biota; the metabolic and molecular diversity of microbial populations and their role in soil processes; the microbiology and biochemistry of decomposition of organic matter in soil; biogeochemical cycling of N, P, S, Si, base cations and metals; and the application of soil microbiology to selected environmental problems. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210, or consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 442 or SOILS 430.
REN R 443 Soil Physics =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Quantitative characterization of soil physical properties. Description and measurement of soil physical properties and transport processes in soils. Examples from areas of land resource management, soil remediation, agriculture, and forestry will be used to illustrate the principles. Prerequisites: (REN R 210 or SOILS 210) and *60 university credit in the sciences. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 443 or SOILS 440.
REN R 444 Environmental Soil Chemistry =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Chemical processes in soil and related terrestrial environments and the consequences of these processes as they relate to soil productivity, environmental quality and pollution of soil and water. The course describes fundamental chemical concepts such as soil solution and solid phase chemistry, sorption phenomena, ion exchange, oxidation-reduction reactions and speciation of metals. These concepts are used to predict the fate (distribution, transport, bioavailability and transformation) of inorganic and organic contaminants in soil. The chemical principles provide fundamental knowledge to develop soil reclamation strategies and nutrient management practices for enhanced crop production. Prerequisite: A chemistry course plus completion of (REN R 210 or SOILS 210) or consent of instructor. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 444 or SOILS 450.
REN R 445 Soil Fertility =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Essential plant nutrients; factors influencing nutrient availability; methods of evaluating soil fertility; correction of soil fertility problems; manufacture, composition, and use of fertilizers. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 445 or SOILS 460.
REN R 446 Climates and Ecosystems =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). The basic principles by which the cycles of water, carbon, and nutrients through soils, plants, and the atmosphere are controlled in terrestrial ecosystems under different climates. Interrelationships among water, carbon and nutrient cycles in natural and managed ecosystems that have developed in different climatic zones. Environmental consequences of human intervention in the cycles for food and fibre production in different ecosystems. Prerequisite: REN R 210 or SOILS 210. Recommended courses: PL SC 221 or BOT 340. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 446 or ENCS 461.
REN R 447 Forest Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This course focuses on understanding and managing insects and diseases in natural and managed forest ecosystems and characterizes how they interact with the environment and each other to affect ecosystem functions and properties. Prerequisites: minimum of *54 university level credits and BIOL 208.
REN R 450 Environmentally Sustainable Agriculture =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Land-management issues that influence the sustainability of both agriculture and the land resource. Role of ecological processes in determining sustainability and the development and adoption of practices that facilitate long-term viability of both agriculture and biophysical resources. The concept of the agro-ecosystem and application of ecological principles to agricultural land management. Use of environmental indicators to measure and predict long-term sustainability of agricultural land management. Prerequisites: *60 at university level including (REN R 210 or SOILS 210), and (BIOL 208 or PL SC 221).
REN R 452 Forest Watershed Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Seminar discussions/presentations on issues and methods in forest management and the production, protection, and regulation of wildland water resources. Relationship between disturbance (natural/anthropogenic) and water yield, regime, water quality. Watershed management as a component of integrated wildland management (ECA procedures, hydrologic modeling, stream protection zones (SPZs), best management practices (BMPs) and cumulative effects assessment). Prerequisite: *60 at university level.
REN R 462 Parks, Ecology, and Society =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An overview of the diversity of management practices among protected areas, including national and provincial parks, interpreted in the context of the ongoing development of ecological science and environmentalism. Prerequisite: REN R 260 or ENCS 260. REN R 364 or ENCS 364 recommended. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 462 or ENCS 462.
REN R 463 Biological Adaptations to Northern Environments Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An overview of evolutionary processes and their role in shaping animals and plants in northern environments; adaptations to extreme conditions and potential effects of climate change will be explored. Prerequisite: BIOL 208 or equivalent. Registration requires enrolment in the BSc Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS) Northern Systems Major, or consent of Department.
REN R 464 Conservation and Management of Endangered Species =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and applied considerations for maintaining endangered, threatened and rare populations and species, including provincial, national and international strategies. Contributory factors to decline and extinction are discussed, as are various recovery programs. Prerequisite: REN R 364 or ENCS 364, or consent of Instructor. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 464 or ENCS 464.
REN R 465 Environmental and Conservation Field Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, variable). Field trip studies with a focus on environmental and conservation biology topics. Course content and offerings vary from year to year, and have included study trips on Northern Ecosystems, National Parks, and Protected Areas, Arctic Tundra, the Florida Everglades, and Galapagos Islands. Prerequisite: *9 in biological or ecological topics. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 465 or ENCS 465. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
REN R 466 Climate Change and the North Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Current and projected impacts of climate change on the circumpolar north, including the land, its biota, northern communities, and drivers that shape these interactions. Prerequisite: enrolment in the BSc Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS) Northern Systems Major, or consent of Department.
REN R 467 Environmental Interpretation and Science Communication =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An overview of theories and methods of communication, as applied to environmental topics and general audiences. Includes discussion of environmental interpretation, science communication, audio-visual communication, and media skills. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 467 or ENCS 467.
REN R 468 Conservation of Genetic Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles and issues in conserving and managing plant and animal genetic resources from the global perspective. Lectures will be supplemented with case studies. Students are assigned tasks, individually and in groups. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
REN R 469 Biodiversity Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the theory and application of biodiversity with an emphasis on quantitative analysis of biodiversity. The course covers the concepts of biodiversity (genetic, species and ecosystem), diversity measurements, estimation of species richness, synthetic patterns and generating mechanisms of species diversity (species-abundance, species-area, distribution-abundance, local-regional, beta diversity, richness-productivity, body size-richness, etc.) and the implications of the patterns and theories to the conservation of biodiversity. Laboratory session involves using statistical software R for analyzing various diversity data. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
REN R 473 Northern Resource Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In-depth analysis of topical issues in northern resource management, including both ecological and socio-political dimensions, and emphasizing underlying scientific principles and adaptive management strategies. Prerequisite: enrolment in the BSc Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS) Northern Systems Major, or consent of Department.
REN R 474 Utilization of Wildlife Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Issues, principles and science surrounding sustainable use of wildlife resources. Hunting, angling and trapping for subsistence, recreational and commercial purposes. Sociopolitical dimensions of harvest regulation, wildlife administration, and human demographic changes. Field trips. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: minimum of *6 of Renewable Resources or Biological Sciences courses at the 300-level or higher. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 474 or ENCS 474.
REN R 476 Advanced Fisheries and Wildlife Management =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Fisheries and wildlife systems management. Approaches covered, include: age/growth analysis, demographics, systems analysis, and other computer and modelling applications in fisheries and wildlife management. Prerequisites: *60 at the university level with at least *6 in Biology or Ecology. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 476 or ENCS 476.
REN R 480 Experimental Design and Data Analysis in the Environmental Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1.5). Introduction to the scientific method; presentation of quantitative data in forestry, conservation and environmental sciences; common research approaches and experimental designs; fundamental concepts of statistics; classical hypothesis testing and Bayesian inference; parametric and nonparametric statistical tests; tests for binomial data; linear, non-linear, and multiple regression. Prerequisite: a minimum of *60 of university-level course; *3 introductory statistics recommended. [Renewable Resources]
REN R 482 Soil Remediation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-0). Principles and methods of biological, chemical, and physical remediation of soils contaminated by hazardous chemicals and other pollutants. Topics include soil-contaminant interactions, microbial processes used in remediation and process fundamentals of remediation technologies including bioremediation and phytoremediation. Other important environmental issues associated with growing industrial activities such as off-shore oil spills, and production of red mud sludge and oil sands tailings are included with potential remediation strategies to address those issues. This course describes approaches to managing contaminated sites incorporating Canadian guidelines and soil quality criteria for soil remediation. Prerequisites: At least *75 university credit with emphasis on biophysical courses, and (REN R 444 or SOILS 450 or REN R 442 or SOILS 430) recommended. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 482 or ENCS 455.
REN R 483 Waste Management and Utilization =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-3s-0). Chemical, biological, and physical properties of anthropogenic wastes, their reactions in the soil environment, theory and practice for their chemical and biological immobilization and use in agriculture, forest, and urban lands. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor, must have completed at least *60 at the university-level. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 483 or ENCS 475.
REN R 491 Land-use Planning in Canada’s North Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Contemporary approaches to land-use planning applied to northern systems in Canada, addressing the integration of social, environmental and economic values, and maintenance of ecosystem integrity through proactive measures. Prerequisites: enrolment and *81 credits at the university level in the BSc Environmental and Conservation Sciences (ENCS) Northern Systems Major, or consent of Department.
REN R 495 Land Reclamation Œ6 (fi 12) (second term, 6-6.5s-0). Principles, practices, and philosophy of reclamation of degraded lands. Topics include types of land disturbances and regulations governing their reclamation, landscape development, site preparation, soil reclamation and remediation, revegetation, seed mix design, planting methods, plant species selection, monitoring, determining success, plant community ecology and change, bioengineering, phytoremediation, vegetative reclamation, and ecological restoration. Team based land reclamation project required. Should be taken in students’ last year as the Capstone Course for the Land Reclamation Major. Prerequisites: *90 university credit including introductory courses in soil science, hydrology, ecology, and vegetation science; and REN R 307 or ENCS 307 or equivalent; and *3 in vegetation science at the 300-or 400-level (e.g. botany, forestry, plant ecology, plant resources, plant science, range science, weed science); and *6 in soil science at the 300-or 400-level. Prerequisites or corequisites: *3 in vegetation science at the 300-or 400-level; and *3 in soil science at the 300-or 400-level; and REN R 482 or ENCS 455. ENCS 406 recommended. Note: This course is not open to anyone who has taken REN R 475 or 485.
REN R 496 Conservation Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 1-0-3). Conservation Planning is a quantitative, inter- disciplinary applied science that prioritizes conservation actions in a spatially- explicit manner. It seeks to understand trade-offs between biological, social and economic factors associated with land use activities. The course is a combination of computing labs that demonstrate key principles and software, lectures to discuss key issues, and a student-led final project to apply key concepts and quantitative techniques. Special emphasis is given to Alberta’s land use planning challenges, although North American examples and exercises are also used. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor, or (REN R 364 or ENCS 364) and (REN R 201 or EAS 221) and (STATS 141 or SCI 151) and *81 university level credits.
Graduate Courses
REN R 501 Topics in Renewable Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3-6 (variable) (either term, variable). Directed study in the multiple aspects of renewable resources. Open to fourth year or graduate students upon consent of instructor.
REN R 523 Silvicultural Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 2 weeks). Silvicultural systems encompass a planned program of silvicultural treatment extending throughout the life of a stand. In this course we visit and examine a variety of silvicultural systems including: clearcutting with natural regeneration and/or planting, seed trees, shelterwood, selection, and variable retention systems. We discuss impacts and implications of these systems in terms of resulting stand structures, cost, risk, growth and yield, habitat, and other issues. The course involves a 10 to 14 day field trip (in May, June or August) to visit a range of silvicultural systems used in forests in western Canada or other regions, as well as written assignments. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Standard University tuition and fees apply. Prerequisite: REN R 323 or FOR 323 or consent of the instructor. Offered in alternate years during summer term. This course has limited enrolment and is closed to web registration. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 523 or FOR 523.
REN R 535 Operations Research for Natural Resource Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Mathematical programming, decision analysis and computer simulation applied to natural resource management problems. Prerequisites: AREC 214 or MATH 120 and at least *60 credit in university courses.
REN R 540 Advanced Soil Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Physical principles of water, solutes, and heat transport in the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum; formulation and solution of mathematical equations describing the dynamic interactions among water, solutes, heat, soil matrix and plants; application of physical theories at the field scale, including effects of the soil spatial variability and preferential flow. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisites: A course in calculus and a course in one of the following: soil physics, soil mechanics, hydrogeology, physics or thermodynamics. Credit may be obtained for only one of REN R 540 or SOILS 540.
REN R 550 Advanced Soil Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-2s-0). This course offers more detailed understanding of chemical concepts such as soil solution and solid phase chemistry, sorption phenomena, ion exchange, oxidation-reduction reactions and speciation of metals. The course also includes the topics related to mineral solubility, carbonate system, and application of stable isotopes. The students are expected to attend and are responsible for the material presented in the lecture portion of REN 444 (Environmental Soil Chemistry). Additional bi-weekly sessions will be held for discussion. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit will only be given for one of REN R 550 or SOILS 550.
REN R 564 Advanced Topics in Wildlife Ecology and Conservation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A seminar course based on current readings and discussion in advanced, topical areas of wildlife ecology and conservation. Discussions will cover conceptual and methodological aspects in a wide range of areas. Prerequisites: ENCS 364 and 464, and/or consent of Instructor.
REN R 580 Biometrical Techniques in Agri-food, Environmental and Forest Sciences =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Application of biometrical techniques in agri-food, environmental, and forest sciences with emphasis on complex analysis of variance designs (i.e., mixed models, split-plot, nested designs, repeated measures, analysis of covariance), regression (linear, non-linear, Poisson); approaches to analysis of categorical data, non-parametric techniques. Prerequisite: a minimum of *90 of university-level course work, REN R 480 (or equivalent), or consent of instructor. (Offered jointly by the Departments of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science and Renewable Resources.)
REN R 595 Advanced Land Reclamation =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). An examination of current topics in land reclamation, ecological restoration, revegetation and remediation of degraded lands. Topics cover vegetation and soil responses to disturbance and development of reclaimed (eco) systems through anthropogenically mediated and natural recovery. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
REN R 603 Graduate Research Skills =OPEN-LIMITED Œ1 (fi 2) (first term, 1.5-0-0). Prepares graduate students to function in a research environment. Focuses on the development of communication and presentation skills, the publication process, and proposal preparation. The grade is credit/ no credit.
REN R 604 Graduate Research Seminar =OPEN-LIMITED Œ1 (fi 2) (second term, 0-2.5s-0). Prepares graduate students to function in a research environment. Focus is applied communication of research. All students are required to present a seminar, present a research poster, and critique a seminar. Attendance at the seminars and poster session is required. If possible, REN R 604 should not be taken until the student has some research results to present. The grade is credit/no credit.
REN R 690 Applied Multivariate and Spatial Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This course introduces descriptive multivariate and spatial statistical techniques for analysis of biological and environmental data. The mathematical foundations of techniques are discussed, but the emphasis of this course is visualization, analysis, and interpretation of complex environmental data sets. Topics include: (1) database management, (2) vector and matrix operations, (3) all basic multivariate techniques, (4) distance-based ordinations, (5) principles of spatial statistics, (6) multivariate analysis of spatial data, and (7) ecological modeling applications. Students will conduct a course project based on their own data sets. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor.
REN R 710 Environmental Assessment Principles and Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles and elements of environmental assessment with an interdisciplinary focus. Topics include types of environmental assessments and when to use them, the Alberta and Canadian environmental assessment processes, the relevant legal framework, sampling and pathways of effects for different biophysical components, mitigation of environmental impacts and assessment of risk. Not available for students with credit in REN R 307 or ENCS 307. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 711 Experimental Design and Data Analysis in the Environmental Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the scientific method; presentation of quantitative data in forestry, conservation and environmental sciences; common research approaches and experimental designs; fundamental concepts of statistics; classical hypothesis testing and Bayesian inference; parametric and non-parametric statistical tests; tests for binomial data; linear, nonlinear, and multiple regression. Not available for students with credit in REN R 480. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 712 Geographical Information Systems Applications in Renewable Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-0-3). This course is a combination of lecture/lab and directed studies to develop advanced GIS skills. A focus of the course is an individual spatial analysis project. Not available for students with credit in REN R 426. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 713 Principles of Remote Sensing Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Basic principles of spectral reflectance and emittance, and atmospheric effects as they apply to the acquisition and analysis of imagery; digital image analysis for geographical information systems; application to renewable resource inventory and management and environmental impact assessment. Not available for students with credit in REN R 410. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 720 Tree Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Study of physiological processes in trees. Emphasis on primary and secondary metabolism, gas exchange, transport processes, growth, and environmental effects. Not available for students with credit in REN R 321. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 721 Forest Ecosystems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Exploration of key concepts regarding the ecology of forest ecosystems at varying temporal and spatial scales. Emphasis will be on relationships between biotic and abiotic components of the ecosystem. Topics covered will include flows of energy and matter, ecosystem dynamics, forest landscapes and biodiversity, impacts of natural and anthropogenic disturbance, forest conservation and ecosystem management. Lab exercises during the first month are held outside. The course is taught using a blended learning approach and is available via remote delivery. May require payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not available for students with credit in REN R 322 or FOR 322. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 722 Silviculture Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Forest regeneration principles and techniques; stand tending including fertilization, thinning, pruning and drainage; harvesting systems for reforestation; nursery practices; reforestation, the law and current practices. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not available for students with credit in REN R 323 or FOR 323. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 723 Forest Harvesting and Transport Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Harvesting and transportation methods and technologies as applied to wood-harvesting operations. This is a general course for students who desire a basic knowledge of current technologies used to conduct forest operations. Offered in alternate years. Not available for students with credit in REN R 335 or FOREN 335. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 724 Wood Science and Utilization Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The anatomy and identification of woods; biological, chemical, and physical properties of wood and its components. Lumber, pulp and paper, and reconstituted wood products technologies. Concept of integrated utilization. Not available for students with credit in REN R 345 or FOREN 355. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 725 Advanced Tree Physiology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Stress physiology of trees and tree seedlings; mechanisms of stress action and stress resistance; effects of silvicultural practices on growth and physiology; planting stress. Not available for students with credit in REN R 421. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 726 Advanced Silviculture Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Readings, discussions and exercises on current topics in silviculture. Possible topics include: forest microsites, forest competition, plantation forestry, partial-cut systems, or intensive management. Offered in alternate years. Not available for students with credit in REN R 423 or FOR 423. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 727 Forest Resources Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Analytical techniques used by renewable resource managers for management of wildland areas for single or multiple outputs; problems of defining optimality when confronted with competing uses and multiple outputs. Not available for students with credit in REN R 430. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 728 Integrated Forest Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Problem solving, decision making and planning in relation to the management of forest resources. Application of models and related tools. Public involvement and issues management will be addressed. Not available for students with credit in REN R 431 or FOR 431. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 729 International Forest Conservation and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term or Spring/Summer, variable). Participation in a trip to a selected region is required as part of the course. Biophysical, social, historical and economic factors that influence forest conservation and management are examined; forest resources, ecological services, forest conservation and management practices, policies and regulations are evaluated and discussed. Students complete background research, participate in seminar discussions, and complete a report on the region visited. A different region is visited each year. Course may not be offered every year. Students must contact the instructor at least 4 months prior to the departure date. Requires payment of additional miscellaneous fees, including a non-refundable deposit that is due at least 3 months prior to the departure date. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not available for students with credit in REN R 456 or FOR 456. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/ MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 730 Physical Hydrology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Principles of physical and land-use hydrology. The interaction of vegetation, soils, and storage processes with physiography and climate in regulation of hydrologic processes and hydrologic response of watersheds including effects of disturbance on these functions. Not available for students with credit in REN R 350. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 731 Forest Watershed Management Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-3s-0). Seminar discussions/presentations on issues and methods in forest management and the production, protection, and regulation of wildland water resources. Relationship between disturbance (natural/anthropogenic) and water yield, regime, water quality. Watershed management as a component of integrated wildland management (ECA procedures, hydrologic modeling, stream protection zones (SPZs), best management practices (BMPs) and cumulative effects assessment). Not available for students with credit in REN R 452. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 732 Disturbance Ecology Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). This course will cover various aspects of disturbance ecology, including concepts of disturbance frequency, severity, intensity; ecological resilience and resistance and ecosystem responses to and recovery from disturbance. Students will define what a disturbance is and critically evaluate disturbance types and their characteristics in different ecosystems and their implications for conservation, sustainability of ecosystems, and application to reclamation / restoration. Not available for students with credit in REN R 440. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 740 Wildland Fire Science and Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles of forest fire science and management in Canadian forest ecosystems. Fire science fundamentals and their applications for addressing complex social, ecological and economic fire management challenges. Topics include fire as a natural disturbance process, mechanisms of fire ignition and spread, fire weather, fire behaviour, and fire occurrence prediction. Models, systems, analytical techniques and policies used to support fire management operations and decisions are explored in relation to contemporary fire management issues. Intended for students in course based masters programs. Not available for students with credit in REN R 340. Requires departmental consent.
REN R 741 Soil Formation and Landscape Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Soil formation, with emphasis on landscape processes as factors in soil development; pedogenic processes and their relation to environmental issues; soils; vegetation, and geological associations; kinds and distribution of soils in Canada; soil classification; field examination and computer-assisted learning of soils and their landscape. Field trips. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not available for students with credit in REN R 441 or SOILS 420. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 742 Soil Biogeochemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Introduction to the main components of the soil biota; the metabolic and molecular diversity of microbial populations and their role in soil processes; the microbiology and biochemistry of decomposition of organic matter in soil; biogeochemical cycling of N, P, S, Si, base cations and metals; and the application of soil microbiology to selected environmental problems. Not available for students with credit in REN R 442 or SOILS 430. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 743 Soil Physics Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Quantitative characterization of soil physical properties. Description and measurement of soil physical properties and transport processes in soils. Examples from areas of land resource management, soil remediation, agriculture, and forestry will be used to illustrate the principles Not available for students with credit in REN R 443 or SOILS 440. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 744 Environmental Soil Chemistry Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Chemical processes in soil and related terrestrial environments and the consequences of these processes as they relate to soil productivity, environmental quality and pollution of soil and water. The course describes fundamental chemical concepts such as soil solution and solid phase chemistry, sorption phenomena, ion exchange, oxidation-reduction reactions and speciation of metals. These concepts are used to predict the fate (distribution, transport, bioavailability and transformation) of inorganic and organic contaminants in soil. The chemical principles provide fundamental knowledge to develop soil reclamation strategies and nutrient management practices for enhanced crop production. Not available for students with credit in REN R 444 or SOILS 450. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 745 Soil Fertility Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Essential plant nutrients; factors influencing nutrient availability; methods of evaluating soil fertility; correction of soil fertility problems; manufacture, composition, and use of fertilizers. Not available for students with credit in REN R 445 or SOILS 460. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 746 Climates and Ecosystems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). The basic principles by which the cycles of water, carbon, and nutrients through soils, plants, and the atmosphere are controlled in terrestrial ecosystems under different climates. Interrelationships among water, carbon and nutrient cycles in natural and managed ecosystems that have developed in different climatic zones. Environmental consequences of human intervention in the cycles for food and fibre production in different ecosystems. Not available for students with credit in ENCS 461 or REN R 446. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 747 Forest Health Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This course focuses on understanding and managing insects and diseases in natural and managed forest ecosystems and characterizes how they interact with the environment and each other to affect ecosystem functions and properties. Intended for students in course based masters programs. Not available for students with credit in REN R 447. Prerequisites: minimum of *54 university level credits and BIOL 208. Requires department consent.
REN R 749 Forest Soils Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Chemical, physical, and biological properties and processes of soil in relation to site and the growth of forest vegetation; nutrient cycling; influences of surface soil erosion, fertilization, and fire upon forest soil productivity: forest land classification. Not available for students with credit in REN R 314 or FOR 314. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 750 Soil and Water Conservation Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Global soil and water resources and their current rates of degradation. The main processes of degradation (erosion, loss of organic matter, salinization, pollution) and their causes. Consequences of degradation and conservation of resources through improved land use practices. Not available for students with credit in REN R 360 or ENCS 360. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 751 Agroforestry Systems Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles, complexity, and diversity of agroforestry. Classification of agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems in North America, specifically Canada. Plant and soil aspects of and interactions among the components in agroforestry systems. Use of agroforestry systems to enhance land productivity and sustainability. Socioeconomic aspects of agroforestry. Not available for students with credit in REN R 414. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 752 Environmentally Sustainable Agriculture Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Land-management issues that influence the sustainability of both agriculture and the land resource. Role of ecological processes in determining sustainability and the development and adoption of practices that facilitate long-term viability of both agriculture and biophysical resources. The concept of the agroecosystem and application of ecological principles to agricultural land management. Use of environmental indicators to measure and predict long-term sustainability of agricultural land management. Not available for students with credit in REN R 450. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/ MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 760 Biodiversity Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the theory and application of biodiversity with an emphasis on quantitative analysis of biodiversity. The course covers the concepts of biodiversity (genetic, species and ecosystem), diversity measurements, estimation of species richness, synthetic patterns and generating mechanisms of species diversity (species-abundance, species-area, distribution-abundance, local-regional, beta diversity, richness-productivity, body size-richness, etc.) and the implications of the patterns and theories to the conservation of biodiversity. Laboratory session involves using statistical software R for analyzing various diversity data. Not available for students with credit in REN R 469. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 761 Restoration Ecology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Principles and practices of restoring ecosystem structure, function and biodiversity after natural or anthropogenic disturbances. The course focuses on ecological theory and how to apply it to ecological restoration. Topics include landscape processes and connectivity, soil-plant processes, techniques, philosophy and ethics and societal aspects of ecological restoration. This course is intended for students in course based masters programs. Not available for students with credit in REN R 366. Requires department consent.
REN R 762 Environmental Footprint Assessment Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). This course examines the effects of humans on the environment. Topics examined include the reduction of biodiversity, alterations to natural and urban systems, changes in perceptions about natural history and decision-making, and the responses of ecosystems and their components to wildlife management. Not available for students with credit in REN R 478. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 763 Management and Conservation of Genetic Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Principles and issues in conserving and managing plant and animal genetic resources from the global perspective. Lectures will be supplemented with case studies. Students are assigned tasks, individually and in groups. Not available for students with credit in REN R 468. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 764 Environmental Interpretation and Science Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). An overview of theories and methods of communication, as applied to environmental topics and general audiences. Includes discussion of environmental interpretation, science communication, audio-visual communication, and media skills. Not available for students with credit in REN R 467 or ENCS 467. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/ MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 765 Principles of Managing Natural Diversity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Introduction to the theoretical foundation for conservation science. Elements of population, community and landscape ecology will be reviewed, and their application to real-world challenges discussed. Objective is to provide students with the scientific tools to evaluate and develop conservation strategies for maintaining diversity in human-altered systems. Ethical and philosophical aspects of the sociopolitical arena in which conservation decisions are made and implemented are also explored. Not available for students with credit in REN R 364 or ENCS 364. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 766 Parks, Ecology, and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). An overview of the diversity of management practices among protected areas, including national and provincial parks, interpreted in the context of the ongoing development of ecological science and environmentalism. Prerequisite: REN R 260 or ENCS 260. REN R 364 or ENCS 364 recommended. Not available for students with credit in REN R 462 or ENCS 462. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 767 The Mosses of Alberta: Conservation and Identification Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). This is an introduction to identification and conservation of the mosses of Alberta, with a strong emphasis on field identification. Students are introduced to the morphological characters used to identify Alberta mosses, with supplementary information about individual species’ habitat affinities and distribution within Alberta. Lecture topics include basic morphology, conservation and management of species diversity, and rare/ endangered species found within Alberta. Students learn to identify more than 110 species from the province’s six major natural regions. Not available for students with credit in REN R 327. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 768 Management and Utilization of Forest Genetic Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Basic principles in plant genetics and resource utilization including tree improvement and reclamation will be covered. Regular lectures will be supplemented with guest lectures and one lab exercise or field trip per month, an individual term report and presentation/discussion lead on a selected paper will be required. Not available for students with credit in REN R 368. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 770 Utilization of Wildlife Resources Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-1). Issues, principles and science surrounding sustainable use of wildlife resources. Hunting, angling and trapping for subsistence, recreational and commercial purposes. Sociopolitical dimensions of harvest regulation, wildlife administration, and human demographic changes. Field trips. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not available for students with credit in REN R 474 or ENCS 474. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 771 Fisheries and Wildlife Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of ecology as applied to the management of fisheries and wildlife communities. Topics include the growth and regulation of populations, interactions among species and their environments, tools and techniques used to assess and manage fisheries and wildlife. Special emphasis will be placed applying knowledge using case studies and class exercises to demonstrate key principles. Not available for students with credit in REN R 376 or ENCS 376. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 772 Advanced Fisheries and Wildlife Management Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Fisheries and wildlife systems management. Approaches covered, include: age/growth analysis, demographics, systems analysis, and other computer and modelling applications in fisheries and wildlife management. Not available for students with credit in REN R 476 or ENCS 476. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/ MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 782 Soil Remediation Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-0). Principles and methods of biological, chemical, and physical remediation of soils contaminated by hazardous chemicals and other pollutants. Topics include soil-contaminant interactions, microbial processes used in remediation and process fundamentals of remediation technologies including bioremediation and phytoremediation. Other important environmental issues associated with growing industrial activities such as off-shore oil spills, and production of red mud sludge and oil sands tailings are included with potential remediation strategies to address those issues. This course describes approaches to managing contaminated sites incorporating Canadian guidelines and soil quality criteria for soil remediation. Not available for students with credit in REN R 482 or ENCS 455. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 783 Waste Management and Utilization Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-3s-0). Chemical, biological, and physical properties of anthropogenic wastes, their reactions in the soil environment, theory and practice for their chemical and biological immobilization and use in agriculture, forest, and urban lands. Not available for students with credit in REN R 483 or ENCS 475. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 795 Land Reclamation Œ6 (fi 12) (second term, 6-6.5s-0). Principles, practices, and philosophy of reclamation of degraded lands. Topics include types of land disturbances and regulations governing their reclamation, landscape development, site preparation, soil reclamation and remediation, revegetation, seed mix design, planting methods, plant species selection, monitoring, determining success, plant community ecology and change, bioengineering, phytoremediation, vegetative reclamation, and ecological restoration. Team based land reclamation project required. Not available for students with credit in REN R 475, 485 or 495. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of instructor.
REN R 796 Conservation Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 1-0-3). Conservation Planning is a quantitative, inter- disciplinary applied science that prioritizes conservation actions in a spatially- explicit manner. It seeks to understand trade-offs between biological, social and economic factors associated with land use activities. The course is a combination of computing labs that demonstrate key principles and software, lectures to discuss key issues, and a student-led final project to apply key concepts and quantitative techniques. Special emphasis is given to Alberta’s land use planning challenges, although North American examples and exercises are also used. Not available for students with credit in REN R 496. Available only to students in MAg, MBA/ MAg, MF, or MBA/MF, or by consent of Department.
REN R 900 Research Project =OPEN-LIMITED Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). Required of all Soils MAg candidates in their final year. It does not usually involve collection of original data but makes use of published or unpublished data from other sources. The report is to be defended before a committee of three staff members, one member being from outside the
Department of Renewable Resources.
REN R 906 Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). The final research project that comprises REN R 906 is a final capping exercise for the degrees of MAg and MF. Its practical and professional focus should integrate the core areas of study in the program. The successful completion of the project entails (1) a research topic approved by the supervisor; (2) the presentation of a draft research proposal; and (3) the presentation of the research as a written document to the supervisor. The project may take the form of any of the following: (1) a formal analysis of management practice, organizational processes or policy; (2) a formative or summative evaluation of a research project or program; (3) a case study, using secondary documents, survey data, or interviews; or (4) replication of a previous study, with either the introduction of a new variable or an analysis in a changed context.
REN R 912 Research Project Œ12 (fi 24) (variable, unassigned). The final research project that comprises REN R 912 is a final capping exercise for the degrees of MAg and MF. Its practical and professional focus should integrate the core areas of study in the program. The successful completion of the project entails (1) a research topic approved by the supervisor; (2) the presentation of a draft research proposal; and (3) the presentation of the research as a written document to the supervisor. The project may take the form of any of the following: (1) a formal analysis of management practice, organizational processes or policy; (2) a formative or summative evaluation of a research project or program; (3) a case study, using secondary documents, survey data, or interviews; or (4) replication of a previous study, with either the introduction of a new variable or an analysis in a changed context.
#
Research
RSCH
Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research
Graduate Courses
RSCH 900 Graduate Research Œ9 (fi 1) (either term, unassigned). Restricted to Visiting Graduate Students at the University of Alberta who are only conducting research. Approval of the Department and the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research required.
#
Rural Sociology
R SOC
Unknown Department
Undergraduate Courses
R SOC 271 The Politics of Food and Natural Resources =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will gain a sociological understanding of contemporary Canadian politics in the food and natural resources sectors. Examination of the nature of political organizations and policymaking in Canada; the particular roles played by the state, the “public,” and certain sectors of civil society, including social movements, industry organizations, labour unions, scientific organizations, and rural and aboriginal peoples. Contemporary case studies may include climate change and energy dependence, genetic engineering in agribusiness, the organic food products movement, mining in the circumpolar north, forestry expansion in the boreal region and cod management in the Atlantic fisheries. Credit will only be given for one of ENCS 271, R SOC 271 or REN R 271.
R SOC 355 Rural Communities and Global Economies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). The historic and contemporary role of rural regions and extractive economies in the global marketplace is discussed from a macrosociological perspective. Sociological concepts are applied to the study of the structural constraints and opportunities facing social and economic systems in rural regions. Prerequisite: *30 or more of university level course work.
R SOC 365 Sociology of Environment and Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Examines the relationship between development and environment at the local, regional, national and international levels. Critically discusses development strategies, the environmental and social forces promoting them, and the distribution of environmental and social impacts. Also examines alternative development strategies, sustainable development experiences and relevant international policy.
R SOC 375 Public Participation and Conflict Resolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The anatomy of environmental and resource management conflict is examined through a lens of critical sociological theory and deliberative democracy. Focusing on contemporary case studies of conflict in energy production, forestry, conservation and protected areas management, social practices and strategies for conflict resolution are explored. Prerequisite: *54 or consent of instructor.
R SOC 400 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study. Study of selected topic or problem requiring both written and oral reports. Prerequisite: consent of the Department Chair. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
R SOC 410 Research Methods and Policy Applications in Applied Environmental Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Empirical applications of theory and methods used in environmental sociology, rural sociology, and natural resource sociology. Involves one or more case study projects that focus on conceptual understandings, field research methods, and policy analysis in the human dimensions of resource management. Prerequisite: R SOC 355, 365, 450 or by consent of instructor. Open to fourth year students in Environmental and Conservation Sciences (Human Dimensions of Environmental Management major) and BA Environmental Studies major.
R SOC 416 Collaborative and Participatory Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for students seeking knowledge and skills for applied and collaborative social science research. Draws on diverse methodological theories with emphasis on themes, issues and tools needed for engaged scholarship. Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 416 or 516. Prerequisite: R SOC 365.
R SOC 443 Resilience and Global Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course explores the links between community and environmental sustainability using the lens of social-ecological resilience. What values/beliefs, knowledge, practices and norms have contributed towards the sustainability of local resources and ecosystems? How are small social groups demonstrating resilience in the face of larger scale political, economic, cultural, and environmental change? Drawing on interdisciplinary social science literature, the course critically discusses concepts, theories and issues of resilience from around the globe. Graduate students may not register for credit (see R SOC 543). Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 443 and R SOC 543. Prerequisite: *60 or more
R SOC 450 Environmental Sociology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Introduction to a field in sociological inquiry that addresses how individuals and groups influence, and are influenced by, natural resources and environmental conditions. Examination of individual-level influences, such as beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors, as well as broader social-level influences at the institutional and organizational level. Focus is on providing an understanding and appreciation for the interaction between human attitudes, behaviors, and organizations with other components of the ecosystem. Prerequisite: *60 or more. An introductory Sociology course is strongly recommended.
R SOC 460 Perspectives on Traditional Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Traditional Knowledge is recognized as integral to environmental sustainability and the social and cultural well-being of indigenous peoples. The course focuses on the development of Traditional Knowledge as a field of inquiry and policy debate in Canadian society. Critical attention to the history, politics and theory behind its definition, classification and use will provide students with perspectives on its importance in addressing emergent issues of environmental change. Prerequisite: *60 or more. Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 400-level and R SOC 500-level.
Graduate Courses
R SOC 500 Research Projects in Rural Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Individual study. Investigations of a special problem involving field or library study and preparation of written reports. Prerequisite: consent of the Department Chair.
R SOC 515 Quantitative Social Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Principles and practice of social research within environmental and natural resource sociology. Topics include survey research, evaluation research, data collection, multi-variable analysis, and report writing. Prerequisite: SOC 315 or equivalent.
R SOC 516 Collaborative and Participatory Research Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed for students seeking knowledge and skills for applied and collaborative social science research. Draws on diverse methodological theories with emphasis on themes, issues and tools needed for engaged scholarship. Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 416 or 516. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
R SOC 543 Resilience and Global Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course explores the links between community and environmental sustainability using the lens of social-ecological resilience. What values / beliefs, knowledge, practices and norms have contributed towards the sustainability of local resources and ecosystems? How are small social groups demonstrating resilience in the face of larger scale political, economic, cultural, and environmental change? Drawing on interdisciplinary social science literature, the course critically discusses concepts, theories and issues of resilience from around the globe. Lectures and labs are the same as for R SOC 443, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 443 and R SOC 543. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
R SOC 555 Advances in Environmental Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). In-depth examination of a select set of current theoretical and empirical areas in the sub-discipline of environmental sociology. Examines the relationships among various environmental and social problems and how such problems and undesirable conditions can be and are being addressed. Prerequisite: R SOC 450.
R SOC 558 The Sociology of Environmental Risk: Theory and Applications =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theoretical and empirical research on the study of environmental risk in the social sciences, and their application in various institutional areas. Divergent theoretical perspectives on risk within the social sciences, directions taken by empirical researchers in the analysis of the construction and perception of environmental risk, as well as current institutional mechanisms for risk management and social impact assessment. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
R SOC 559 States, Social Movements and the Environment =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Covers classic and contemporary theories of states and social movements and their application to environmental and ecological issues. Topics include the Environmental State; relationships among state and societal forces; sub-national, national, and international environmental politics; political distinctions among environmental and ecological issues; and the potential for sustainability governance. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
R SOC 560 Perspectives on Traditional Knowledge Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Traditional Knowledge is recognized as integral to environmental sustainability and the social and cultural well-being of indigenous peoples. The course focuses on the development of Traditional Knowledge as a field of inquiry and policy debate in Canadian society. Critical attention to the history, politics and theory behind its definition, classification and use will provide students with perspectives on its importance in addressing emergent issues of environmental change. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Credit will only be given for one of R SOC 400-level and R SOC 500-level.
R SOC 600 Directed Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of selected research problems and design of research projects in rural, resource, environmental and development sociology. Prerequisite: Consent of Department Chair.
R SOC 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Russian
RUSS
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a Russian language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) Students requiring information about program planning and course selections for the Dalhousie University-University of Alberta Russian Studies Program in the USSR (see Arts section) should consult an undergraduate advisor in the Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies.
(5) See also Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Slavic and East European Studies (SLAV) listings and INT D courses offered by the Faculty of Arts.
Undergraduate Courses
RUSS 111 Beginners’ Russian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). For students with little or no background in Russian, the course emphasizes oral communication while developing basic listening, reading and writing skills. Cultural practices are taught as an integral part of the language. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Russian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Two lab hours online/not scheduled.
RUSS 112 Beginners’ Russian II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Prerequisite: RUSS 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Russian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries. Two lab hours online/not scheduled.
RUSS 211 Second-Year Russian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-0-0). Russian grammar, composition, oral practice. Prerequisite: RUSS 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 201 or 202.
RUSS 212 Second-Year Russian II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 4-0-0). This course is a continuation of RUSS 211. Prerequisite: RUSS 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 202.
RUSS 303 Russian in Context I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The continued development of grammatical and conversational skills, with reading contemporary Russian and viewing and discussing films and television programs. Prerequisite: RUSS 212 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 401 or 402.
RUSS 304 Russian in Context II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Debates on topics selected by students. Prerequisite: RUSS 303 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in RUSS 401 or 402.
RUSS 325 Readings in Russian Literature I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of pre-20th century Russian literature. Readings and discussion normally in English, but discussion may be in Russian.
RUSS 326 Readings in Russian Literature II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading and analysis of texts from 20th century Russian literature. Readings and discussion normally in English, but discussion may be in Russian.
RUSS 333 Saints and Sinners =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Religious and anti-religious themes in Russian literature of the 19th and 20th centuries, highlighting the reflection of Russian Orthodox and popular culture in the texts. This course is taught in English and will not fulfill the Language other than English requirement.
RUSS 403 Russian Media and Internet =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of popular media in today’s Russia. Intensive reading, critical discussions, and creative writing. Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other Than English requirement of the BA.
RUSS 404 Russian Film =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of Soviet and contemporary Russian films. Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other Than English requirement of the BA.
RUSS 443 Russian-English Translation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exercises in translation with emphasis on both literary and non-literary texts. Prerequisite: RUSS 304, or consent of Department. Not open to students with credit in RUSS 441 or 442.
RUSS 445 Business Russian =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced modern Russian with emphasis on the vocabulary and communication style of the Russian business world. Prerequisite: RUSS 304 or consent of Department.
RUSS 495 Honors Thesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
RUSS 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
RUSS 698 Topics in Russian Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
RUSS 699 Topics in Russian Literature and Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
Scandinavian
SCAND
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Note: See also listings under Danish (DANSK) Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS), Norwegian (NORW) and Swedish (SWED).
Undergraduate Courses
SCAND 326 Scandinavian Children’s Literature Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A study of the narrative and pictorial tradition of Scandinavian children’s literature from the 17th century to the present. The stories and picture books will be discussed in their historical, pedagogical, and social contexts. Taught in English.
SCAND 328 Scandinavian Crime Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of contemporary crime fiction novels from Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Iceland. Works covered range from the time of the ground breaking Swedish writers Maj Sjöwall and Per Wahlöö to the present day. Taught in English.
SCAND 341 Old Norse Mythology and Legends =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of Old Scandinavian mythology from the earliest times to the end of the Viking Period. Readings in English from the Poetic and Prose Eddas, including the heroic legends and lays. Also included is a brief look at runic inscriptions and skaldic poetry. This course does not fulfill the language-other-than-English requirement of the BA degree.
SCAND 342 Vikings and Sagas =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survey of the cultural history of the Viking and Medieval periods in Scandinavia with selections in English from the Old Norse sagas. The course will also include a brief overview of Scandinavian folklore. This course does not fulfill the language-other-than-English requirement of the BA degree.
SCAND 343 Scandinavia Through Folklore Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of Scandinavian folk literature as an expression of the human experience from pre-industrial to contemporary Scandinavia. Taught in English.
SCAND 356 Women in Scandinavian Literature and Popular Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Various media which reflect women’s lives and voices in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Iceland, and Samiland. Note: This course will be taught in English and will not fulfill the Language other than English requirement.
SCAND 399 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
SCAND 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
SCAND 551 Old Norse Grammar =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the grammar of Old Icelandic with readings of illustrative texts. This course does not fulfill the language other than English requirement for the BA.
SCAND 552 Readings in Old Norse, Runology and Paleography =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings of illustrative texts in Old Icelandic including a survey of runic writing and Old Norse manuscripts. Texts in modern Icelandic will also be examined. Prerequisite: SCAND 551 or consent of Department. This course does not fulfill the language other than English requirement for the BA.
#
School of Public Health
SPH
School of Public Health
Undergraduate Courses
SPH 416 One-Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). “One Health” is an emerging paradigm in public and veterinary health which recognizes that human, animal and environmental health are interlinked. The course will address food and water safety, the increase in prevalence of antibiotic resistant organisms, emerging infectious zoonotic diseases, environmental protection and environmental sustainability, emphasizing the interaction of these diverse yet interconnected disciplines in protecting the health of populations. Graduate students may not register for credit (see SPH 516). Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 416, 516 or SPH 416, 516. Prerequisite: AN SC 310, PHYSL 210 or ZOOL 241/242.
Graduate Courses
SPH 500 Introduction to Health Policy and Management =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course provides an overview of the development, organization, financing, delivery and management of the Canadian health system. Students will examine the health care system’s central assumptions, the distribution of power and authority within the system, current debates about the system’s future, and the potential for political action. Recognizing that the existing health care system is the result of power struggles and contestable political choices, the lectures and readings will encourage students to think critically about health care policy in Canada. By the end of the course, students should be formulating their own opinions about future directions for health care. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 501 Determinants of Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will be expected to apply knowledge of selected social determinants of health to multi-level interventions to improve health of individuals, communities, and populations. The course takes an ecological approach to the analysis of health needs and the design of public health actions. Students will apply key social science theories to the analysis of social determinants of health. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 502 Conducting Research in Health Promotion Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). A critical review of research methods and intervention strategies in health promotion. A broad range of research, review, and evaluation strategies will be presented including both quantitative and qualitative approaches. Emphasis is on developing a critical understanding of the application of different research strategies to answer specific health promotion questions. Students will be expected to develop and present their thesis proposal or significant research project within this course. Pre or corequisite: SPH 501 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 502 and SPH 502.
SPH 503 Introduction to Health Promotion Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Foundations of basic and applied research in health promotion. Consideration is given to a broad range of research strategies including qualitative and quantitative methods. Emphasis is on a critical understanding of why, when, and how to apply different research strategies to answer specific health promotion questions. Pre or corequisite: SPH 501. Students with insufficient background in undergraduate statistics will be required to complete a qualifying course in this area. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 503 and SPH 503.
SPH 504 Health Promotion Planning and Evaluation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is designed to provide students with knowledge of the basic concepts, principles, facts and theories which relate to health program planning and program evaluation. Emphasis is on understanding the interface between and among planning principles, evaluation processes and organizational structures. The course also stresses the importance of analytical and communication skills as they apply to these processes. Prerequisites: SPH 501 and 503. Not to be taken by students with credit in INT D 504. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 504 and SPH 504. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 505 Fundamentals of Public Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an overview of the various disciplines making up and impacting on public health. Discussions will cover the Canadian health care system, infectious and chronic disease epidemiology and control, environmental health, occupational health, health care evaluation, disease prevention, health promotion, and disease and exposure assessment. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 505 and SPH 505.
SPH 506 Public Health Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an understanding of the biology of human health and disease as it affects public health. Normal biochemistry, physiology and immunology of healthy humans. Exploration of mechanisms responsible for genetic, nutritional, infectious, toxic and chronic diseases and their effects on human populations. Factors affecting human health and disease during stages of human development including infancy, youth, reproduction, pregnancy and aging. Examine the basis for current health promotion, disease prevention and control strategies. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 506 and SPH 506.
SPH 508 Health Inequities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is designed to prepare students to understand, and apply appropriately, concepts related to health inequities; and to critically assess research in this area. The course will have a core section for all students, with two options: Addressing Health Inequities (designed for Public Health practitioners), and Researching Health Inequities (appropriate for students in research degree programs). Prerequisite: SPH 501, 505, or 604. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 508 and SPH 508.
SPH 509 Health Promotion with People in Low Resource Countries Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In this course, learners apply a health promotion lens to examining health issues in a low-resource environment, and possibilities for action toward positive, sustainable change. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 510 Health Promotion with Communities =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). In this course, learners focus on people taking collective action to influence change. Comprehensive strategies for promoting health are examined and analyzed by example, framed by “empowerment” education, creating supportive environments, strengthening community action and advocating for healthy policies. Learners explore questions and challenges in applying health promotion principles, concepts and theories to practice at the community level. The value of democratic approaches to decision-making is an underlying premise for this course. Pre or corequisite: SPH 501. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 510 and SPH 510. Credit will be granted for only one of SPH 510 or NURS 531. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 511 Environmental Contaminant Exposure Assessment =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles and practice of monitoring exposure to environmental contaminants, external and internal dose. Biomarkers for environmental contaminant dose estimation. Environmental and biological sampling. Routes of exposure, absorption, and distribution. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 511 and SPH 511.
SPH 512 Environmental Risk Assessment and Management =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Concepts of risk to health and environment, assessment, management and communication of risk, hazard identification, links to exposure assessment, toxicology and epidemiology, dose response assessment, risk characterization, regulatory and policy science. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 512 and SPH 512.
SPH 514 Introduction to Environmental Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces environmental health issues and scientific understanding of their causes in developed and developing countries. Examines the role of environmental factors (biological, chemical, and physical) and its importance in relation to other factors that affect health of a community. Provides case studies of how environmental factors are dealt with in practice; including methods and approaches for assessment, prevention, and control. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 516 One-Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). “One Health” is an emerging paradigm in public and veterinary health which recognizes that human, animal and environmental health are interlinked. The course will address food and water safety, the increase in prevalence of antibiotic resistant organisms, emerging infectious zoonotic diseases, environmental protection and environmental sustainability, emphasizing the interaction of these diverse yet interconnected disciplines in protecting the health of populations. Lectures are the same as for SPH 416, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 516 and SPH 516. Credit will only be given for one of AFNS 416, 516 or SPH 416, 516. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor.
SPH 517 Strategies in Health Promotion Practice =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An analysis of the principles of intervention at individual, community, organization and policy development levels. An overview of the strategies used in the practice of health promotion/evaluation and their application in a variety of health promotion settings (e.g., schools, the workplace, community and health centres). Prerequisite: SPH 501. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 505 and SPH 517. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 518 Psychosocial Perspectives on Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical, interdisciplinary review of psychosocial health. Theoretical and methodological implications from a variety of disciplinary perspectives are considered. Prerequisite: SPH 501 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 508 and SPH 518. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 519 Biostatistics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). An introduction to elementary biostatistical methods used to analyze epidemiologic data. Topics will include analysis of 2 x 2 tables, nonparametric methods, linear regression, analysis of variance, direct and indirect standardization, and analysis of censored data. Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 598 and SPH 519.
SPH 520 Occupational and Environmental Diseases =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is designed to provide students with an overview of the pathophysiology and epidemiology of selected occupational and environmental diseases. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 520 and SPH 520.
SPH 521 Occupational Hygiene =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an introduction to occupational hygiene theory, principles, and practice. It covers the recognition, evaluation, and control of common occupational health hazards including chemicals, biological agents, physical agents, and ergonomic issues. The course is not designed to prepare hygienists for practice. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 521 and SPH 521.
SPH 522 Principles of Toxicology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is geared to health care professionals who need to understand the basic principles of toxicology, to appreciate the physiological and/or biochemical mechanisms underlying target organ toxicity, and to able to make initial qualitative risk assessments on the potential toxicity of agents. It will emphasize toxins in the work and home environment. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 522 and SPH 522.
SPH 523 Advocacy for Public Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is designed to introduce the student to the exciting world of public health advocacy and reflect the realities health policy in Canada today. It is expected that the class will become actively engaged in one of several group projects to develop an advocacy campaign. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 504 and SPH 523.
SPH 525 Public Health Nutrition =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nutrition is a major public health issue. Under- nutrition, malnutrition and over-nutrition all affect the health of individuals and mortality in developing countries, malnutrition to various nutrition related diseases and over-nutrition to obesity and numerous chronic diseases globally. The discipline of Public Health Nutrition focuses on the promotion of good health through nutrition and the primary prevention of nutrition related illness in the population. This course in Public Health Nutrition provides a broad knowledge base on causes and public health consequences of under-, mal- and over-nutrition, and address issues related to nutritional research methods, nutritional assessment methods, nutritional intervention strategies, and nutrition policies.
SPH 527 Food Safety Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Providing students with an understanding of the principles of risk: benefit evaluations related to the metabolic consequences of exposure to food borne chemicals and therapeutic agents, and to safety concerns about foods. Lectures are the same as for NU FS 427, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Credit will only be given for one of SPH 527, AFNS 527 or NU FS 427. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
SPH 529 Health Community and Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This graduate course is grounded in an ecological framework that explores three major components: health, community and development. An ecological framework allows us to explore these things in an interconnected manner. Health, defined from a broad social determinants of health view and both the principles and practice of community development will be examined from a theoretical and practical perspective. The phenomenon of ‘development’ will be critically analyzed. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 531 Statistical Methods in Health Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Basic biostatistical concepts and methods used in health science research including; the role of biostatistics in research including ethics-related issues and data management; exploratory data analysis and data presentation by tabulations and graphics; estimation and comparisons of means, proportions, rates; introduction to regression analysis; and non-parametric methods. Students cannot receive credit for both SPH 519 and 531. Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course or consent of Instructor. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 533 Risk Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced principles, concepts, processes and strategies for the communication of risks to human health posed by potentially hazardous agents or situations. Topics include communication and risk communication theory, the risk communication process, and the role of risk communication as part of an integrated risk management strategy, as well as an in depth examination of empirical research methods and specific risk communication issues. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 516 and SPH 533.
SPH 542 Case Studies in International Primary Health Care =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This introductory course helps students to understand the approaches used by various countries in solving their health and medical problems. Some of the current important issues in international health will be analyzed and discussed, using examples from selected developing countries. The relevance to countries in the developed world (or Canadian context) is also examined. This course introduces interventions to some of the major diseases and health problems in developing countries. Students also become familiar with the role of major international health organizations. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 542 and SPH 542.
SPH 543 Health Ethics, Law and Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Students will understand the connections and distinctions among ethics, law and public policy in health contexts, and should be able to reason critically about legal and policy influences on public health and health care. Several different approaches to ethical analysis are studied, as are brief introductions to policy-making processes and legal principles and structures in Canada. Special attention is paid to justification (rather than mere opinion or imposition) and the limits of ethics, laws and policies to identify or enforce the best practices in health contexts. Several problem areas (e.g. health care system reform, health research, organization and management ethics, human rights and multiculturalism) are examined in light of the theoretical foundations in pursuit of effective and justified health policy. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 543 and SPH 543.
SPH 550 Introduction to Health Care Finance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Financial structure of the health care system, Introduction to managerial accounting with special emphasis on the management of health care agencies. Principles of costing. Multiproduct and case mix measures. Resource use decisions, budgeting and control, and pricing analysis for health care organizations. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 550 and SPH 550.
SPH 555 Foundations of Public Health Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is for students to gain competencies in three areas: determinants of health and strategies to address these; ontologies, epistemologies and research designs relevant to public health research; knowledge mobilization and engaged scholarship. Sessions will usually comprise introductory interactive presentations and small/large group discussions. Class time and assignments are aimed at enhancing students’ understanding, critical analysis and application of key concepts and selected issues related to Public Health, research methods used in Public Health and Knowledge translation.
SPH 561 Topics in Public Health =OPEN Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0).
SPH 565 Topics in Public Health Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 1-0-0).
SPH 566 Special Seminars =OPEN Œ3-9 (variable) (either term, variable). Prerequisite: consent of Director of Graduate Education. Content varies from year to year. Topics are announced prior to registration period. The student’s transcript will carry a title descriptive of the content. May be repeated. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 570 Introduction to Health Care Economics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of health economic theory and empirical studies, topics and areas covered include: (1) demand, supply, and utilization; (2) production and costs; (3) resource allocation in health care labor markets; (4) selected facets of health care planning; (5) benefit cost analysis. The empirical studies examined in the course require an understanding of simple and multiple regression techniques. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 570 and SPH 570.
SPH 580 Management and Design of Health Care Organizations =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to prepare students to become effective managers and leaders in the health service organizations and health care systems. It facilitates this objective by providing a foundation for the acquisition of the knowledge of the managerial process through an analysis and understanding of the psychological, sociological and political basis of complex social systems, as well as providing a basis for acquiring conceptual and practical skills in the effective management and design of health service organizations and health care networks. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 580 and SPH 580.
SPH 581 Basics of Public Health Leadership =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). This course is intended to provide students with an initial exploration of what leaders actually do, and with an understanding of the basic skill-set necessary for successful leadership on a continuing basis. It is very clear that successful leaders must be able to effectively lead change, particularly in today’s fast-paced health environment. As part of this course, you will find yourself quickly developing an understanding of the process of change, the reasons why there is such a range in the quality of change leadership, and your own personal approach to becoming a successful change leader. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 581 and SPH 581.
SPH 582 Human Resources in Public Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Develops a basic understanding of human resource trends and issues in public health organizations. Examines topics such as strategic health human resources; organizational effectiveness; healthy work environments; workplace culture; legal and policy frameworks; human resources planning and recruitment; selection, orientation, training, mentoring and career development; performance management and discipline; compensation and benefits; labour relations and collective bargaining; regulated health professionals; and other health human resources policy issues and challenges. Prerequisite: SPH 580 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 582 and SPH 582.
SPH 583 Whole Systems Approaches to Organizational Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the theoretical basis of the whole systems approach to organizational change and the advantages of this approach compared to traditional approaches. It overviews the range of whole systems methodologies available for organizational change initiatives. The course leads to an in-depth knowledge of a number of the whole systems methodologies that will prepare practitioners to make informed decisions regarding their appropriateness for application in specific organizations or organizational situations. It leads finally to an in-depth, hands-on working knowledge (and experience level) with one of the most utilized whole systems methodologies in today’s organization development world, i.e., Appreciative Inquiry. Prerequisite: SPH 580 or SPH 581 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 583 and SPH 583.
SPH 593 Issues in Injury Control =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introductory course that highlights injuries as a major and neglected public health problem. Leading causes of injuries, including motor vehicle, falls, fires, violence, drowning, occupational, and recreational will be addressed in informal lectures and class discussions. The biomechanics of injury and the structure of emergency medical systems will also be covered. Prevention strategies and evaluation of various interventions will be introduced. Prerequisite: consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 593 and SPH 593.
SPH 596 Epidemiology Methods I =OPEN Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 2-0-0). An introduction to the theory of epidemiology with an emphasis on study design. Topics include the nature of epidemiologic reasoning, indices used to describe and measure health status, interpretation of studies, causation, descriptive studies, analytic studies, intervention studies, and ethics. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS/SPH 596 and SPH 597.
SPH 597 Fundamentals of Epidemiology for Public Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to promote an understanding of epidemiological methods and study designs and their application to improving human health, and is designed for students not specializing in epidemiology or biostatistics. Topics include measures of disease frequency, study design, bias, confounding, and assessing causation. A focus will be on critical review of epidemiologic studies through case studies. Students cannot receive credit for both PHS 596 and SPH 597. Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course or consent of Instructor. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 598 Field Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, 13 weeks). Public health practice is an integral part of the MPH degree. The practicum is a full-time hands-on experience in a public health work setting. It provides the opportunity for students to integrate and synthesize public health philosophy, theory and practice through application and critical assessment. Students contribute to a community or organization’s capacity to critically assess public health issues, and design, implement and evaluate strategic initiatives, while at the same time gaining confidence and skills as public health professionals. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: Vary by specialization.
SPH 599 Capping Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 0-3s-0). MPH students will complete a project where they demonstrate their ability to integrate and synthesize public health concepts, principles and theories and apply their critical thinking skills in a project of relevance to the field of public health. Must be completed in the final term of the MPH program. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisites: SPH 598 Field Practicum.
SPH 600 Health Policy Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An overview of the principles and methods underlying the analysis of health policy. Application of health policy principles to selected issues and problems in health policy. Prerequisite: SPH 500 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 600 and SPH 600.
SPH 601 Comparative Health Systems =OPEN Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will provide a comparative analysis of models and practices across six countries that have universal health systems with some reference to selected other countries where innovative models exist. The first half of the course will focus on the foundations of health systems (Organization, Governance and Financing; Economics, Public/Private Models and System Performance; Human Resource Management and Demand/Utilization Management) to provide a grounding to understand the differentiating features of the six health systems. The second half will explore three themes of contemporary interest to the Canadian health system. These thematic areas will be primary health care, pharmaceutical policy and public health strategies.
SPH 602 Engaged Scholarship for Health Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-2s-0). An interdisciplinary seminar intended to prepare students with the knowledge and skills necessary to engage effectively with communities and the health system in research and practice. Students will explore the concepts of engaged scholarship and how these can be best applied in their field of expertise to promote research that is both relevant and of high quality. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 602 and SPH 602. All PhD students are required to complete this course or SPH 607 and 610. Students can only receive credit for SPH 602 or 607 and 610.
SPH 603 Scientific Communication in Public Health =OPEN Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-2s-0). An interdisciplinary seminar designed to explore communication in public health including: written and oral communication of research to scientific and lay audiences, grant proposal and manuscript writing, poster and oral presentations. All PhD students are required to complete this course. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 603 and SPH 603.
SPH 604 Advanced Theory and Research Methods in Public Health =OPEN Œ2 (fi 4) (either term, 0-2s-0). Exploration of current topics in public health research including: epidemiology, health service delivery, health policy, sociobehavioural approaches, occupational and environmental health. All PhD students are required to complete this course. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 604 and SPH 604.
SPH 605 Health Law and Administration =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will introduce students interested in careers in health administration and policy development to relevant issues in health law and risk management in the context of the Canadian legal and public health care systems. It will start with a discussion of the Constitutional foundation of health law in Canada with an analysis of Canada’s Federal political structure, Federal and Provincial jurisdictions in health care, and the influence of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Canada Health Act. It will introduce students to administrative structures and related law. The second part of the course will offer a practical exploration of issues that may confront health managers and policy makers, including medical negligence; informed consent; employment and labour law; contract law (e.g., procurement contracts); public health information; privacy and confidentiality; and regulation of health professions. Students will present papers on special topics in public health law such as infectious disease management, HIV/AIDS, vaccines, tobacco control, food-borne illnesses, intersections with criminal justice, Aboriginal peoples and public health, and genetics and public health. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 606 and SPH 605.
SPH 607 Introduction to Engaged Scholarship Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). An introductory seminar intended to provide students with the knowledge and critical thinking skills necessary to conduct research that is relevant and credible to intended users. The course includes a theoretical overview of engaged scholarship, knowledge translation and related concepts, and practical examples of how these concepts and principles could be applied to a diversity of research topics and methods. This course is the first of two required seminars in Engaged Scholarship for Health for PhD students in the School of Public Health. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 607 and SPH 607. Students cannot receive credit for both SPH 602 and 607.
SPH 608 Psychosocial Perspectives on Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical, interdisciplinary review of psychosocial health. Theoretical and methodological implications from a variety of disciplinary perspectives are considered. Prerequisite: SPH 501 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 608 and SPH 608. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 609 Individual Directed Reading and Research in Public Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SPH 610 Applied Engaged Scholarship: Principles to Specific Research Projects Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 0-1s-0). This course will apply engaged scholarship concepts and principles to the development of the student’s specific thesis research. This course is the second of two required seminars in Engaged Scholarship for Health for PhD students in the School of Public Health. Prerequisites: SPH 607, selection of thesis topic and methodology. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 608 and SPH 610. Students cannot receive credit for both SPH 602 and 610.
SPH 618 Diversity and Health in Families and Communities =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theoretical approaches and practical issues regarding the provision of health care in Canada with a focus on aboriginal, refugee and immigrant families. Human ecological models, health promotion, and ethical issues will be examined within a framework of cultural diversity. Pre and corequisite: SPH 501 or consent of instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HECOL 618 and SPH 618. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 618 and SPH 618. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 619 Biostatistics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Advanced biostatistical methods used to analyze epidemiologic data with an emphasis on multivariate regression. Topics include multiple regression, unconditional and conditional logistic regression, proportional hazards regression, and Poisson regression. Prerequisite: SPH 519 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 698 and SPH 619.
SPH 622 Theory and Practice of Health Promotion Interventions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A critical examination of intervention strategies, implementation, and research evidence in health promotion practice. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 602 and SPH 622. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 623 Qualitative and Community-Based Approaches in Health Research =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Theoretical understanding of qualitative and community-based research designs, including phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, biography and case study. Methods of data collection such as interviews, focus groups and participant observation. Strategies for data analysis and dissemination. Pre or corequisite: SPH 503 or consent of instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 603 and SPH 623. Credit may not be obtained for both HECOL 603 and SPH 623. May contain alternate delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
SPH 631 Health Program Evaluation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Deals with the application of program evaluation for the health and social sciences fields. Emphasis is on the theory of program evaluation using various models, research design, and the application of these concepts by performing a program evaluation. Discussions will be centered around the ethics, reliability, validity, process, outcomes, and implications of various program evaluation models. Current and relevant publications in public health sciences complete this course. Prerequisite: SPH 630 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 631 and SPH 631.
SPH 633 Risk Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Advanced principles, concepts, processes and strategies for the communication of risks to human health posed by potentially hazardous agents or situations. Topics include communication and risk communication theory, the risk communication process, and the role of risk communication as part of an integrated risk management strategy, as well as an in depth examination of empirical research methods and specific risk communication issues. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both HPS 616 and SPH 633.
SPH 640 Introduction to Global Health =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The aim of this course is to enable students to increase their understanding of historical and current determinants of global health and of the interventions to reduce global health inequities. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 640 and SPH 640.
SPH 641 Global Health Project Development =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This introductory course to global health project development familiarizes students with the logical frame planning approach. This planning method is a must by many international development agencies, e.g. the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the World Bank and many others. Through various stages of problem analysis, objective analysis and the development of the logical frame with planning indictors and assumptions, course participants learn how to apply this method in the context of a developing country. Prerequisite: Permission of the Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 641 and SPH 641.
SPH 661 Topics in Public Health Œ1 (fi 2) (either term, 1-0-0).
SPH 665 Topics in Public Health Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 1-0-0).
SPH 671 The Economic Evaluation of Health Care =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The application of economic principles to the evaluation of health care practices. The use of various outcome measures. Cost effectiveness and cost benefit analysis. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 671 and SPH 671.
SPH 673 Technology Assessment for Health Care =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An overview of the nature, science and practicalities of health technology assessment (HTA), which can then be used as the basis for further work and research. Issues covered will include health care technologies and their management, methods used for assessment, sources of information and application of HTA findings to policy and administrative decisions. Emphasis placed on assessments that have been undertaken by national and regional agencies in Canada and other countries to provide information to governments, health care providers and others. Diagnostic, screening, rehabilitation and information technologies will be considered. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 673 and SPH 673.
SPH 680 Health Care Marketing and Planning =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Health care marketing and planning involves the analysis, evaluation, implementation and control of carefully formulated programs designed to bring about voluntary exchanges with a target audience for the purpose of achieving organizational objectives. The purpose of this course is to provide the students with a general understanding of the contribution of marketing and strategic planning to the effective management of health care institutions and public health programs. The course facilitates this objective by providing a foundation for the acquisition of marketing concepts, terms, and skills relevant for understanding the role that marketing and planning play in health care institutions and health systems, the design of health care programs, and as a vehicle for social change. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 680 and SPH 680.
SPH 682 Advanced Leadership: Leadership Assessment and the Development of Individual Leadership Strategies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to provide self and 360 degree assessment of individual characteristics that influence leadership styles, strategies and outcomes, e.g., emotional intelligence, personality types, learning styles, etc. When the assessments are complete the students will then develop their own leadership strategy that takes into account the findings from the assessments, i.e., develop their own customized leadership strategy that capitalizes on strengths, eliminates or at least minimizes weaknesses, uncovers potential “blind spots” when serving as a leader, and that considers “fit” between person and position. Prerequisite: SPH 582 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 682 and SPH 682.
SPH 685 Methods for the Assessment of Health-Related Quality of Life =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The primary objective is to provide students with the background knowledge and methodological skills to be discriminating and informed users of health-related quality of life measures and interpreters of HRQL evidence. Topics include uses of HRQL measures, various systems for classifying HRQL measures, methodologies for the assessment of reliability, validity, responsiveness, and interpretability, and conceptualization of major approaches for the development of HRQL measures (including psychometric, clinical, and economics and decision analytic approaches). Examples of different types of measures and their application in a wide variety of clinical areas are included. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 685 and SPH 685.
SPH 692 Systematic Reviews Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The objective of this course is to provide students with the background knowledge and methodological skills to be discriminating and informed users of systematic reviews. Topics include developing a research question, literature searching, reference management, selection of studies, quality assessment, evidence synthesis (some statistical knowledge required), heterogeneity, and interpretation of the evidence. Students are expected to develop their own question and conduct a systematic review over the course of the term. Prerequisites: SPH 531 or SPH 519 and 693, and permission of the Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 692 and SPH 692.
SPH 693 Critical Appraisal of Health Science Literature in Epidemiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Methods for efficiently and critically identifying, appraising, and applying the health sciences literature are learned in an interactive group setting. Topics include studies of prognosis, diagnosis, therapy, causation outcomes research, economic analysis, and systematic reviews. Prerequisite: SPH 596 or 597 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 693 and SPH 693.
SPH 695 Epidemiology of Injuries/Design and Evaluation of Injury Interventions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An advanced course focusing on the review of current epidemiologic knowledge of injuries relating to the leading causes of injury, morbidity, and mortality. Strategies for data acquisition and use in injury research will be introduced. Tools will be presented that will allow students to develop the practical skills needed to design, implement, and evaluate injury prevention programs. Prerequisite: SPH 593. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 695 and SPH 695.
SPH 696 Epidemiology Methods II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Epidemiologic methods related to specific study designs and general issues relating to the conduct of epidemiologic studies at an advanced level. Topics covered include confounding, interaction, misclassification, matching, ecologic studies, justification of the odds ratio in case-control studies, and age-period-cohort analysis. Prerequisite: SPH 519 and 596 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 696 and SPH 696.
SPH 697 Epidemiology and Control of Infectious Diseases =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-2s/2-0). This course provides a broad introduction to the knowledge needed to investigate and control infectious diseases. It covers the description, causes and modeling of epidemic and endemic infections, as well as intervention and prevention strategies. Selected infectious diseases are used as case studies. These provide understanding of the natural history, evolution, investigation, methods of control, and the costs and benefits of interventions in a legal and ethical policy context. Prerequisites: SPH 519 and 596, or their equivalent, and permission of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 697 and SPH 697.
SPH 699 Use and Analysis of Linked Administrative Health Data =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (Spring/Summer, 3-0-0). Administrative health data have been used widely for decision making and research in Canada and the world. Analysis of these data required knowledge of data features and unique analytical skills since data are not collected for research purposes. This course will help hone students data management and analytical skills to answer research questions using health systems data. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 699 and SPH 699.
SPH 719 Biostatistics III =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced biostatistical methods for the design and analysis with a special emphasis on applications for health sciences research. Topics include longitudinal and correlated data analysis methods (including generalized estimating equations and random-effects models), meta-analysis, advanced survival analysis, ROC-analysis, Bayesian philosophy and statistical evidence, factor analysis, and statistical methods for molecular/genetic epidemiology. Prerequisites: SPH 619 or permission of the Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 798 and SPH 719.
SPH 766 Advanced Epidemiology Methods Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This is an advanced epidemiology methods course, designed primarily for doctoral students intending to conduct epidemiological research. Topics covered include advanced conceptual, methodological and practical issues in observational study designs and causal modeling; theoretical issues and practices in surveillance, primary data collection and use of administrative databases, advanced issues in assessing and controlling confounding, and unique challenges in doing epidemiological research in various topic areas. The overall goal of this course is to help prepare its graduates to conduct independent epidemiological research. Prerequisites: SPH 619 and 696 or consent of Instructor. Note: Credit may not be obtained for both PHS 766 and SPH 766.
#
Science
SCI
Faculty of Science
Undergraduate Courses
SCI 101 Foundations of Science Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the culture, practice, and ways of thinking in science. This course will (a) emphasize the importance of the scientific approach to understanding and explaining the world, and (b) promote the discovery of the science student’s role within the world. Students will engage in active and discovery-based learning. Through lectures, guided activities, and academic and real-world projects, students will gain skills and strategies of broad use in the areas of critical thinking, creative problem solving, and information literacy. Restricted to students who have completed less than *30.
SCI 151 InSciTE: Scientific Inquiry and Data Analysis Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-3). This interdisciplinary science project course, which is rooted in statistical analysis and the scientific process, is the keystone course of the Interdisciplinary Science Threshold Experience (InSciTE). Students will explore connections between scientific disciplines while engaging in individual and group activities in the lecture and laboratory. This course includes both instructor and student directed projects that incorporate concepts and methods in applied statistics such as data collection and presentation, descriptive statistics, probability, sampling distributions, the central limit theorem, point estimation and hypothesis testing, correlation and regression analysis, goodness of fit and contingency table. Prerequisite: Pure Mathematics 30 or Mathematics 30-1. Credit may not be obtained for both SCI 151 and either STAT 151, PEDS 109, or SOC 210. Corequisites: CHEM 101 and MATH 117 or MATH 134 or MATH 144 in the Fall term. Enrollment is by consent of the Faculty of Science and requires formal admission to InSciTE.
SCI 299 Science Citizenship Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-1.5). Supervised participation in a student-initiated community service learning and citizenship project. In this course, students will work in interdisciplinary groups to research and present the science underlying a global issue, as well as implement a local solution to that global issue. The course will also include a discussion of the possible career paths, ethics, culture and values of scientists. Normally taken after completion of a minimum of 30 units of course weight in a program in the Faculty of Science. Prerequisite: GPA of 2.5 or higher, at least five science courses, and consent of Faculty of Science. Enrollment is by consent of the Faculty of Science and requires a formal application. Application does not guarantee a Science Citizenship class position. Course information available at the Science Citizenship (SCI 299) website or Faculty of Science. Course is limited to students in the Faculty of Science.
#
Science, Technology, and Society
STS
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Note: See the following sections for listings of other Office of Interdisciplinary programs. Comparative Literature (C LIT); Humanities Computing (HUCO); Interdisciplinary (INT D) Faculty of Arts Courses; Middle Eastern and African Studies (MEAS); Religious Studies (RELIG); and Writing Studies (WRS).
Undergraduate Courses
STS 200 Introduction to Studies in Science, Technology and Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the interrelations of science, technology, society and environment, emphasizing an interdisciplinary humanities and social sciences perspective. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in INT D 200. [Faculty of Arts, Office for Interdisciplinary Studies]
STS 210 Environment, Science, Culture, and Values =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the interrelations between human cultural frameworks and environmental issues, emphasizing an interdisciplinary humanities and social sciences perspective.
STS 350 Understanding Video Games =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Beginning with an exploration of games in general and leading to modern video games. Prerequisite: CMPUT 250 or consent of the Program.
STS 351 Understanding Video Games =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, variable). Beginning with an exploration of games in general and leading to modern video games. This course will be delivered on-line and is offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Not open to students with credit in or enrolled in STS 350.
STS 498 Individual Research Project in Science, Technology, and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An individual research project on issues at the intersection of Science, Technology, and Society, to be completed under the direction of a supervisor. Prerequisite: consent of the Program Director.
#
Sciences infirmières
SC INF
Faculty of Nursing
Undergraduate Courses
SC INF 217 Introduction aux sciences infirmières Œ8 (fi 16) (premier semestre, 2-6s-2). Une introduction à l’étude des sciences infirmières centrée sur la pratique professionnelle, et sur les soins communautaires et de longue durée (residence assistée). L’accent est mis sur les communautés et client(e)s francophones. Préalables: ANATE 140, PHYSE 152, et MICRE 133. Concomitants: SC INF 218 et NURS 305. Note: Ce cours est reserve aux étudiant(e) s du programme BSc inf. bilingue. Remarque: Les étudiantes doivent obtenir une note de passage d’au moins C+ afin de pouvoir continuer dans le programme.
SC INF 218 Introduction à la pratique infirmière Œ6 (fi 12) (premier semestre, 0-14C-0). Pratique infirmière novice dans la communauté francophone, les centres de soins de longue durée et les residences assistées. L’accent est mis sur la promotion de la santé des client(e)s dans toutes les phases de la vie. Préalables: ANATE 140, PHYSE 152 et MICRE 133. Concomitants: SC INF 217 et NURS 305. Note: Ce cours est reserve aux étudiant(e) s du programme BSc inf. bilingue.
SC INF 301 Recherche en sciences infirmières Œ3 (fi 6) (premier semestre, 3-0-0). Introduction au processus de la recherche en sciences infirmières. Le cours comprend entre autre l’analyse comparative d’études choisies qui représentent différentes approches théoriques, méthodologiques, et analytiques. L’accent est mis sur la communication de la recherche, les besoins de l’utilisateur, et le développement des habiletés nécessaire à la critique de la recherche. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e)s du programme BSc inf. bilingue.
SC INF 309 La santé mentale Œ6 (fi 12) (premier semestre, 3-6s-3 6w; 6-12s-6 3w). L’emphase de ce cours est sur la promotion de la santé mentale et les soins infirmiers aux personnes atteintes d’altérations aigües et chroniques de santé mentale. Préalables: NURS 215, 307 et 308. Concomitant: NURS 310 ou SC INF 310. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e) s du programme BSc inf. bilingue.
SC INF 310 Pratique infirmière en santé mentale Œ6 (fi 12) (premier semestre, 0-24c-0 7 semaines). Les étudiant(e)s auront l’occasion de mettre en pratique les concepts de sciences infirmières autour des problèmes en santé mentale aigües et chroniques dans un milieu communautaire et/ou dans un hôpital. Préalables: NURS 215, 307 et 308. Concomitant: NURS 309 ou SC INF 309. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e)s du programme BSc inf. bilingue.
SC INF 409 Le leadership et les enjeux en sciences infirmières Œ3 (fi 6) (l’un ou l’autre semestre, 0-3s-0). Dans le cadre des soins de santé primaires, une variété d’enjeux professionnels, sociaux, politiques et mondiaux actuels qui influencent la profession infirmière et le système de santé du Canada, seront abordés. Les principes clés de leadership et de gestion seront également examinés dans le contexte de ces enjeux. Préalable: NURS 307. Note: Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e)s du programme BSc inf. bilingue. Les étudiant(e)s de ce programme ne doivent pas s’inscrire au cours NURS 409 quand SC INF 409 est offert.
SC INF 494 Synthèse des connaissances en sciences infirmières Œ3 (fi 6) (deuxième semestre, 0-7s-3 en 4 semaines). Synthèse et emphase sur les connaissances et l’application de la recherche en sciences infirmières dans un champ de pratique infirmière. Afin de pouvoir s’inscrire à ce cours l’étudiant(e) doit avoir complété avec succès tous les autres cours du programme BSc inf. bilingue, sauf le cours concomitant SC INF 495.
SC INF 495 Pratique infirmière VIII Œ9 (fi 18) (deuxième semestre, 1-34c-0 en 10 semaines). Approche exhaustive et consolidée à la pratique infirmière professionnelle. Concomitant: NURS 494 ou SC INF 494. Ce cours est réservé aux étudiant(e)s du programme BSc inf. bilingue. Les étudiant(e)s de ce programme ne doivent pas s’inscrire au cours NURS 495.
#
Slavic and East European Studies
SLAV
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) None of these courses will fulfil the language-other-than-English requirement of the BA degree.
(2) For related courses see listings under Polish (POLSH), Russian (RUSS) and Ukrainian (UKR).
(3) For additional courses relating to the Soviet Union and its successor states, and Eastern Europe, see also entries under Comparative Literature (C LIT), Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (EAS), Economics (ECON), History (HIST), Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS), Political Science (POL S), and Sociology (SOC).
(4) See also INT D courses which are offered by the Faculty of Arts and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
SLAV 204 Slavic Folklore and Mythology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introductory course covering pre-Christian deities and neo-paganism, legends and lower mythology, folktales and folk songs, and the use of folklore in literature, film, and music. Taught in English. This course will not fulfill the Language Other Than English requirement of the BA.
SLAV 299 Topics in Slavic Cultures =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Various aspects of Polish, Russian and Ukrainian popular and high cultures within the historical and social context. Taught in English.
SLAV 399 Topics in Slavic Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Taught in English. Students may choose to do readings in a Slavic language. May be repeated for credit when topics vary. This course will not fulfill the Language Other Than English requirement of the BA.
SLAV 468 Nikolai Gogol/Mykola Hohol’ =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Gogol as a cultural icon in the history of Russian and Ukrainian literatures. His life and works against the background of Russian Imperial cultural developments and the processes of nation building in the first half of the 19th century. English translations of texts available for those not majoring in Slavics.
SLAV 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
Note: See also INT D 543 and 544 for courses offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as an option or as a course in this discipline.
SLAV 568 Nikolai Gogol/Mykola Hohol’ =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Gogol as a cultural icon in the history of Russian and Ukrainian literatures. His life and works against the background of Russian Imperial cultural developments and the processes of nation building in the first half of the 19th century. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
#
Sociology
SOC
Department of Sociology Faculty of Arts
Note: See also INT D 393 and 394 for courses which are offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as options or as a course in this discipline.
Undergraduate Courses
SOC 100 Introductory Sociology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of the theory, methods, and substance of Sociology. The study of how societies are shaped including economy, culture, socialization, deviance, stratification, and groups. The process of social change through social movements, industrialization, etc. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 300.
SOC 203 Social Problems =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected structural issues in various societies, including inequality, population growth, environment, and human rights. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 102.
SOC 210 Introduction to Social Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Statistical reasoning and techniques used by sociologists to summarize data and test hypotheses. Topics include describing distributions, cross-tabulations, scaling, probability, correlation/regression and non-parametric tests. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor. Note: This course is intended primarily for students concentrating in Sociology
SOC 212 Classical Social Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The foundational contributions and relevance of the works of Marx, Weber, Durkheim and others to sociology and social theory. Course emphasizes close reading of primary texts to cultivate reading, writing and reasoning skills. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of the instructor.
SOC 224 Sociology of Deviance and Conformity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Processes involved in defining behaviour patterns as deviant; factors that influence conformity and change; examination of behaviour patterns such as sexuality, alcoholism, drug use, and selected mental and physical disabilities; public reaction to such behaviour.
SOC 225 Criminology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination and attempted explanation of crime and juvenile delinquency, with an analysis of the social processes leading to criminal behaviour.
SOC 226 Social Studies of Surveillance =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical analysis of the increased prominence of diverse forms of surveillance in contemporary society.
SOC 241 Social Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the study of individual and group behaviour observed in social processes. Prerequisites: SOC 100, or PSYCO 104 or 105, or consent of instructor. Note: SOC 241 and PSYCO 241 may not both be taken for credit.
SOC 242 Biologically Coordinated Social Psychology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A biologically consistent introduction to the study of individual and group behaviour observed in social processes. Prerequisite: One of SOC 100, PSYCO 104, PSYCO 105, EDPY 200 or consent of instructor.
SOC 251 Population and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Population trends, issues and concerns in Canada and international contexts; social and cultural factors underlying fertility, mortality, and migration; urbanization; population change; population theory; and demographic analysis.
SOC 260 Inequality and Social Stratification Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the study of structured social inequalities and poverty; major theoretical approaches; findings from key empirical studies, with emphasis on Canada. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 269 Introductory Sociology of Globalization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces various aspects of globalization and its impact on our lives at local, national, and international levels. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 271 Introduction to the Family =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the study of family relationships and their variant forms with focus on mate selection, couple, kin, age, and gender dynamics, family dissolution or reconstitution and change. A comparative approach with emphasis on families in Canada.
SOC 291 Introduction to Environmental Sociology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sociological examination of the relationship between human societies and the natural environment.
SOC 301 Sociology of Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative study of sex roles in selected societies with an emphasis on contemporary Canada; sex-specific role behaviours and theories regarding their origin; recent sociological research on the social effects of sex roles. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 315 Introduction to Social Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Research design, data collection, and data processing strategies used by sociologists. Topics include research values and ethics, reliability and validity, experimentation, survey research techniques, historical methods, field research, and content analysis. Prerequisite: SOC 210 or consent of instructor.
SOC 321 Youth, Crime and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of the understanding and treatment of youth in the Canadian criminal justice system. Prerequisite: SOC 225 or consent of instructor.
SOC 327 Criminal Justice Administration in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The evolution and evaluation of the theories of punishment; the law, the police and the courts; penal and reformatory institutions; probation and parole; experiments in reform and rehabilitation. Prerequisite: SOC 225 or consent of instructor.
SOC 335 Themes in Contemporary Social Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Major theoretical questions through analysis of works by contemporary theorists. Prerequisite: SOC 212 or consent of the instructor. Not open to students with credit in SOC 332, 333, or 334.
SOC 343 Social Movements Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). How social movements arise and their impact on culture, society and politics. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 344 Media Culture and Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critical examination of the central issues and debates about the media-society relationship. Emphasis on the cultural, political and economic aspects of various media forms/genres, media theories, and audience considerations. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 346 and not to be used as the prerequisite for SOC 444 or 477.
SOC 345 Cultural Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to theoretical paradigms, methodologies and fundamental concepts of postmodern sociology and cultural studies. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 346 Media and the Production of Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Media as cultural industries that contribute to the construction of meaning in contemporary societies. Prerequisite: Restricted to Faculty of Arts students who have completed the first year of their programs or consent of instructor. Note: This is the prerequisite for SOC 444. SOC 346 may not be taken by students with credit in SOC 344.
SOC 363 Sociology of Work and Industry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sociological analysis of the changing nature and content of work, its diversity of industrial contexts and organizational forms, and its consequences for individuals and society, from Canadian and comparative perspectives. Prerequisite: SOC 100. Not open to students with credit in SOC 366.
SOC 366 People in Industry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the sociological analysis of the attitudes and behaviour of employees in work organizations, with emphasis on contemporary Canada. Note: Restricted to Engineering students only. Not open to students with credit in SOC 363.
SOC 367 Knowledge and Human Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Factors in the development and organization of knowledge; interrelations between knowledge and major social systems, societal institutions and culture. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor
SOC 369 Sociology of Globalization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Critically examines various aspects of globalization from the perspective of world-system studies. Prerequisite: SOC 269 or consent of instructor.
SOC 370 Racism in the Western World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theoretical and empirical perspectives on racism; examining the marginalization of minority groups in Western countries on the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, and immigrant status. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 375 Sociology of Aging Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Aging as a socio-cultural phenomenon. Includes aging in relation to the self-concept, family, religion, politics, health, retirement and leisure, housing, attitudes toward death, with particular emphasis on Canadian society.
SOC 376 Sociology of Religion Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Religion as a social phenomenon: theories of religious behaviour; religious authority and leadership; the individual’s religion and the interplay with other spheres of social life; the role of religion in relation to social change and social integration. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 377 Sociology of Youth Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The comparative analysis of youth in various types of societies, with special emphasis on Canada including investigation of social structures and processes influencing behaviour of young people.
SOC 382 Sociology of Health and Illness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The distribution of health and illness in human populations, the social psychology of health and illness, and the social organization of health care. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 399 Field Placement in Criminology Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-16s-0). Supervised work experience and seminar sessions. Note: Restricted to BA (Criminology) students.
SOC 401 Honors Individual Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual study opportunity on topics for which no specific course is currently offered by the Department. Course may be taken once only. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and Honors Advisor. Note: Restricted to Sociology Honors students. Closed to web registration.
SOC 402 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Content varies from year to year. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of the instructor. Note: Consult the Department for any additional prerequisites. Course may be taken more than once if topic(s) vary.
SOC 403 Individual Study Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Individual study opportunity on topics for which no specific course is currently offered by the Department. Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor and the Undergraduate Advisor.
SOC 407 Honors Essay I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature review and proposal stage of Honors Essay completed in SOC 408. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and Honors Advisor. Note: Restricted to Sociology Honors students. Closed to web registration.
SOC 408 Honors Essay II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: SOC 407 and consent of instructor and Honors Advisor. Note: Restricted to Sociology Honors students. Closed to web registration.
SOC 420 Selected Topics in Criminal Justice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary annually. Consult Department or instructor prior to registration. Prerequisite: SOC 225 or consent of instructor. Course may be taken more than once if topic(s) vary.
SOC 421 Sociology of Punishment Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and contemporary social underpinnings of punishment in the criminal justice apparatus. Prerequisites: SOC 225 or consent of instructor.
SOC 423 Crime and Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Social responses to criminal behaviour, including general public attitudes and government legislation. Topics include police strategies; sentencing options; prediction research, and social prevention. Prerequisites: SOC 225 or consent of instructor.
SOC 427 Immigration, Ethnicity, and Crime Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An exploration of the debates around immigration, ethnicity and crime. Prerequisite: SOC 225 or consent of instructor.
SOC 435 Theorizing ‘the Social’: Critical Debates in Social Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Seminar in fundamental assumptions and philosophy of social sciences and the relation between explanatory and normative theorizing. Prerequisite: SOC 212 or 335 or consent of the instructor.
SOC 441 Sociology of Religious Sects Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examination of conversion, membership maintenance, member disaffiliation, and resource acquisition strategies among religious sects. Emphasis on Canadian examples. Prerequisites: SOC 376 or consent of instructor.
SOC 444 Critical Media Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of media texts as social forms with emphasis on television, advertising, and emerging media technologies. Prerequisite: SOC 346 or consent of instructor.
SOC 445 Cities and Suburbia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). The significance of urban social spaces and environments, architecture, planning, design and material culture. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 451 Sociology of Human Fertility Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasis on the social, social-psychological, and cultural correlates of human fertility in historical and contemporary contexts; reproductive health programs; prediction and control. Prerequisite: SOC 251 or consent of Instructor.
SOC 452 Mortality and Population Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Analysis of variations, trends and patterns of human mortality and morbidity in historical and contemporary contexts; comparisons of the experiences of Canada, other industrialized nations and developing countries with respect to causes of death and illness; demographic aspects of aging and its relationship to morbidity and mortality health surveys and policies. Prerequisite: SOC 251 or consent of instructor.
SOC 456 Data Analysis and Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A practical approach to social science research that focuses on methods for preparing, analyzing, and presenting data. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor
SOC 459 The Demography of Marriage and Family Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review and analysis of the demographic interrelationships of fertility, mortality, and migration with marriage and the family; a cross-cultural review of historical trends, contemporary patterns and future implications; emphasis on statistical measurement, family planning and policy in the Canadian setting. Prerequisite: SOC 271 or consent of instructor.
SOC 461 Sociology of Art Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A sociological study of art forms including painting, literature, music, and architecture; cross-cultural analysis of the roles of the artist; the relationship of art forms and movements to different social conditions and social change. Prerequisite: SOC 212 or consent of instructor.
SOC 473 Sociology of Death and Dying Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparative examination of death and dying in socio-cultural contexts, including theoretical and methodological issues. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or consent of instructor.
SOC 476 Religion and Societies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A comparative survey of the major world religions in interaction with the socioeconomic and political structures of various societies. Prerequisite: SOC 376 or consent of instructor.
SOC 477 Media and Cultural Globalization: Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). How global flows of people, information, popular entertainment and consumer culture contribute to collective social identities at the local level. Prerequisites: SOC 212 or 269 or 346 or consent of the instructor.
SOC 486 Sociology of Mental Illness Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sociological aspects of mental health and illness. Includes historical perspectives, diagnostic issues, and perspectives on causation and treatment. Prerequisite: SOC 224 or 382 or consent of instructor.
SOC 496 Human Rights in International Perspective Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Human rights theories, issues and controversies in local, national and international context. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or POL S 101 or POL S 417 or PHIL 101 or HIST 110 or HIST 114 or consent of instructor.
SOC 499 Advanced Field Placement in Criminology Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-16s-0). Supervised work experience and seminar sessions. Prerequisite: SOC 399. Note: Restricted to BA (Criminology) students.
Graduate Courses
Note: See also INT D 593 for a course which is offered by more than one Department or Faculty and which may be taken as an option or as a course in this discipline.
SOC 503 Conference Course in Sociology for Graduate Students Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0).
SOC 504 Conference Course in Sociology for Graduate Students Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0).
SOC 509 Quantitative Data Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Prerequisites: SOC 210 or equivalent and SOC 315 or equivalent. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 411 or 410.
SOC 515 Quantitative Methods in Social Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Prerequisites: SOC 210 and 315 or equivalent. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 412 or 417. Not available for credit for students with credit in R SOC 415.
SOC 518 Qualitative Methods in Social Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Prerequisite: SOC 418 or equivalent or permission of Instructor.
SOC 519 Comparative and Historical Methods in Sociological Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisites: SOC 210 and 315 or equivalent. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 419.
SOC 524 Advanced Field Placement in Criminal Justice Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 0-40c-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: restricted to MA (Criminal Justice) students.
SOC 525 Seminar in Criminal Justice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 531 Seminar in the History of Sociological Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 533 Research Design Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 535 Seminar in Contemporary Sociological Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: SOC 333.
SOC 549 Social Movements Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 550 Seminar in Population and Life Course Dynamics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 552 Mortality and Population Health Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: SOC 251. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 452.
SOC 557 Sociology of Human Fertility Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: SOC 251. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SOC 451.
SOC 580 Colonialism, Post-colonialism and Globalization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 585 Cities and Suburbia Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 602 Selected Topics in Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Content varies from year to year. Course may be taken more than once if topics(s) vary.
SOC 603 Conference Course Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0).
SOC 604 Conference Course Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0).
SOC 605 Seminar in Teaching and Professional Skills Œ0 (fi 1) (either term, unassigned).
SOC 606 Special Topics I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0).
SOC 607 Special Topics II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-1.5s-0).
SOC 616 Structural Equation Modeling with LISREL Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: SOC 609.
SOC 622 Topics in Criminology and Deviance Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 634 Material and Virtual Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 656 Topics in Environmental Sociology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 670 Sociology of Gender and Family Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 672 Social Structure and Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 676 Globalization, Religion and Fundamentalisms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SOC 696 Human Rights in Theory and Practice Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An exploration of the sociology of human rights in theory and practice in a national and international context.
SOC 900 Directed Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, unassigned).
#
Spanish
SPAN
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a Spanish language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) All courses at the 300-level, except SPAN 330 and 360 which are taught in English, include language acquisition among other course requirements.
(5) See also listing under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS).
Undergraduate Courses
SPAN 111 Beginners’ Spanish I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Intended for students with no previous knowledge of the language and designed to lead to a working knowledge of spoken and written Spanish with a focus on listening, reading, speaking, writing, and intercultural competence. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or with Spanish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
SPAN 112 Beginners’ Spanish II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of SPAN 111. Prerequisite: SPAN 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with native or near native proficiency, or with Spanish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
SPAN 211 Intermediate Spanish I =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Intended to further develop knowledge of spoken and written Spanish with a focus on intercultural communicative competence. Prerequisite: Spanish 30 (or equivalent) or SPAN 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with advanced standing equivalent or near native ability.
SPAN 212 Intermediate Spanish II =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). A continuation of Spanish 211. Prerequisite: SPAN 211 or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with advanced standing equivalent or near native ability.
SPAN 300 Advanced Spanish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). A high-intermediate to advanced-level course intended to improve overall proficiency in spoken and written Spanish. Emphasis on intercultural communicative competence. Prerequisite: SPAN 212 or consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with advanced standing equivalent or near native ability or with credit in SPAN 306.
SPAN 306 Spanish for Heritage Speakers =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Intended for speakers with an advanced level of oral proficiency, but no previous formal study of Spanish. Focus is on topics such as grammar and sentence structure, spelling and punctuation, interference between English and Spanish, and colloquial versus formal usages with the objective of improving skills in oral and written communication. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in SPAN 300.
SPAN 314 Civilization and Culture of Spain =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Through a series of selected topics, the course offers a panoramic view of Spanish civilization and culture from the Medieval Period to our present time with an overall emphasis on the construction of ‘Spanish’ cultural identities. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 315 Civilization and Culture of Latin America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A panoramic overview of Latin American civilization and culture from Precolumbian times to the present. Designed to provide an introduction to the major trends in thought and cultural forms. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 320 Introduction to Literary Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students develop the skills required for advanced studies in Spanish and Spanish American literature through the careful study of a variety of literary texts. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 321 Foundational Fictions of Spanish America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings from selected texts to continue language acquisition and to introduce students to aspects of Spanish American literature and culture. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 323 Latin American Literature and the Environment =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The study of the relationship of Latin American writing and writers to the environment with a focus on the landscape and current ecological concerns. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 325 Introduction to Cinema =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Some of the major works of film of Spain and/or Spanish America. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 326 Hispanic Children’s Literature =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Key works of children’s literature in Spain and Latin America. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 332 The Culture of Food =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Through an examination of texts about food (cookbooks, novels, films, music, journalism, etc.) students will gain an understanding of how food serves as a locus for concerns about nationalism, ethnicity, gender, and politics in Latin America. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 333 Reading Popular Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course will look at questions of nation, class, race and gender in Hispanic popular cultural production. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 335 The Spanish Caribbean Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Literature and culture in Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 341 The ‘Roaring Twenties’ in Transatlantic Perspective =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Cultural production of Spanish America and Spain in the 1920’s. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 370 The Sounds of Spanish Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sound system of Spanish: phonetics, phonology, evolution of the language. Special attention to the pronunciation differences from English. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 373 Spanish as a World Language Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focus on the evolution of Spanish from Latin and its spread around the world. Examines the different varieties of Spanish as well as practices and attitudes regarding the use of Spanish in different regions. Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department. Note: Not open to students with credit in SPAN 372. May be taken in place of SPAN 372 for program requirements.
SPAN 399 Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: SPAN 300 or 306 or consent of Department.
SPAN 405 Exercises in Translation: Spanish into English Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisites: *3 in SPAN at the 300 level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of the Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
SPAN 406 Exercises in Translation: English into Spanish Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisites: *3 in SPAN at the 300 level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of the Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
SPAN 407 Advanced Grammar and Composition Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Focus on meanings expressed by different grammatical structures in Spanish, with reference to translation differences with English. Practice of different styles of writing. Prerequisites: *3 in SPAN at the 300 level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of the Department. Note: This course can also be applied to the MLCS Certificate in Translation Studies.
SPAN 425 Hispanic Filmmakers Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). Study of one to three different Hispanic filmmakers. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of the Department.
SPAN 426 Creative Non-Fiction Workshop in Spanish Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A writing workshop in Spanish. Students will gain exposure to evolving issues, standards, and research methodologies in professional writing. Genres may include literary journalism, memoir, travel writing, and personal essay. Prerequisite: *3 in SPAN at the 300-level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of Department.
SPAN 428 Spanish Literary Masterpieces Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). An in-depth study of the most influential works of Span. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of the Department.
SPAN 440 Topics in Spanish Peninsular Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of the Department.
SPAN 441 Reading Colonial Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Colonial Identities, power and ideology, mobilized through various forms of representation. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of the Department.
SPAN 444 Hispanic Drama Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). A study of different dramatic forms from Spain and/or Latin America in their historical, social, political, and cultural contexts. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of the Department.
SPAN 450 Topics in Spanish-American Literature and Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of Department.
SPAN 460 Self Portraits in Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Testimonial writing, biography, and autobiography, memories, correspondence, diaries, interviews and confessions. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 or consent of Department.
SPAN 475 Spanish in Society Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Language as a social phenomenon. Description of dialects in Spanish. Language shift, bilingualism, language attrition, code-switching and langugage attitudes. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 and an additional *3 in SPAN at the 300-level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of Department.
SPAN 476 The Acquisition of Spanish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Issues relating to the acquisition of Spanish as a second language, education, and language policies, and language pedagogy in the literature and in practice. Prerequisites: SPAN 320 and an additional *3 in SPAN at the 300-level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of Department.
SPAN 495 Honors Thesis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SPAN 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
Graduate Courses
SPAN 505 Exercises in Translation: Spanish to English =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 506 Exercises in Translation: English to Spanish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 525 Hispanic Filmmakers =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-3). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 526 Creative Non-Fiction Workshop in Spanish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A writing workshop in Spanish. Students will gain exposure to evolving issues, standards, and research methodologies in professional writing. Genres may include literary journalism, memoir, travel writing, and personal essay. Prerequisite: *3 in SPAN at the 300-level excluding 300 and 306, or consent of Department.
SPAN 528 Spanish Literary Masterpieces =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 535 Topics in Hispanic Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 541 Reading Colonial Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 542 Hispanic Drama =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 552 Indigenous America =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 555 Literature, War, and Revolution =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 556 Constructing the Nation =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 560 Self Portraits in Writing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 575 Spanish in Society =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 576 The Acquisition of Spanish =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 599 Directed Reading =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 615 Latin American Film in Theory and Context =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
SPAN 698 Topics in Spanish Linguistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SPAN 699 Topics in Spanish Literature and Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
#
Statistics
STAT
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences Faculty of Science
Note: Statistical software packages will normally be used in courses that contain data analysis.
Undergraduate Courses
STAT 141 Introduction to Statistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Random variables and frequency distributions. Averages and variance. The binomial and normal distribution. Sampling distributions and elementary inference. X2-test for contingency tables. Regression and correlation. Analysis of variance. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2, or consent of Department. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has been obtained in any STAT course, or in PEDS 109, PSYCO 211 or SOC 210.
STAT 151 Introduction to Applied Statistics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Data collection and presentation, descriptive statistics. Probability distributions, sampling distributions and the central limit theorem. Point estimation and hypothesis testing. Correlation and regression analysis. Goodness of fit and contingency table. Prerequisite: Mathematics 30-1 or 30-2. This course may not be taken for credit if credit has been obtained in any STAT course, or in PEDS 109, PSYCO 211, SCI 151 or SOC 210.
STAT 235 Introductory Statistics for Engineering Œ3.8 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, 3-0-1.5). Descriptive data analysis. Calculus of Probability. Binomial, multinomial, Poisson, normal, beta, exponential, gamma, hypergeometric, and Weibull distributions. Sampling distributions. Estimation, testing hypotheses, goodness-of-fit tests, and one-way analysis of variance. Linear correlation and regression. Sampling. Quality control. Use of a microcomputer software package for statistical analyses in engineering applications. Prerequisite: MATH 100. Corequisite: MATH 101. Credit may not be obtained in STAT 235 if credit has already been obtained in STAT 141, 151, 222, 265, 266; PSYCO 211, SCI 151 or SOC 210. Intended for Engineering students. Other students who take this course will receive *3.0.
STAT 252 Introduction to Applied Statistics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Methods in applied statistics including regression techniques, analysis of variance and covariance, and methods of data analysis. Applications are taken from Biological, Physical and Social Sciences, and Business. Credit may be received in at most one of STAT 252, 319, 337, or 341. May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for STAT 368 or 378. Prerequisite: STAT 141 or 151 or 235 or SCI 151 or equivalent.
STAT 265 Statistics I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Sample space, events, combinatorial probability, conditional probability, independent events, Bayes Theorem, random variables, discrete random variables, expected values, moment generating function, inequalities, continuous distributions, multivariate distributions, independence. Corequisite: MATH 214 or 217. Credit may not be obtained for both STAT 265 and STAT 221.
STAT 266 Statistics II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Functions of random variables, sampling distributions, Central Limit Theorem, law of large numbers, statistical models for the data, likelihood, parameters and their interpretation, objectives of statistical inference, point and interval estimation, method of moments, basic notions of testing of hypotheses, errors of the first and second kind, significance level, power, p-value. Prerequisite: STAT 265. Corequisites: MATH 215 or 317, and 225 or 227. Credit may not be obtained for both STAT 266 and either of STAT 222 or STAT 366.
STAT 312 Mathematical Methods in Statistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Reviews and extends those topics in the prerequisite courses in calculus and linear algebra which are of particular interest in Mathematical Statistics. These include the basics of mathematical reasoning as evidenced by the presentation of rigorous arguments, notions of continuity, differentiation, Riemann-Stieltjes integration and numerical optimization, and diagonalization results for real symmetric matrices. Applications to statistical theory will include least squares estimation, generating functions, and distribution theory. Prerequisites: MATH 215, 225 and STAT 266.
STAT 335 Statistical Quality Control and Industrial Statistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Control charts for variables and attributes. Process capability analysis. Acceptance sampling: single and multiple attribute and variable acceptance plans. Prerequisite: STAT 235 or 265.
STAT 337 Biostatistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-2). Methods of data analysis useful in Biostatistics including analysis of variance and covariance and nested designs, multiple regression, logistic regression and log-linear models. The concepts will be motivated by problems in the life sciences. Applications to real data will be emphasized through the use of a computer package. Prerequisite: STAT 151 or SCI 151 and a 200-level Biological Science course. Note: This course may not be taken for credit if credit has already been obtained in STAT 252, 368 or 378.
STAT 353 Life Contingencies I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Time at death random variables, continuous and discrete insurances, endowments and varying annuities, net premiums and reserves. Prerequisites: MATH 253 and STAT 265. Corequisite: MATH 215.
STAT 361 Sampling Techniques =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Simple random sampling from finite populations, stratified sampling, regression estimators, cluster sampling. Note: This course may only be offered in alternate years. Prerequisite: STAT 266, or STAT 235 and consent of instructor.
STAT 368 Introduction to Design and Analysis of Experiments =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles of experimental design, completely randomized design-one way ANOVA and ANCOVA, randomized block design, Latin square design, Multiple comparisons. Nested designs. Factorial experiments. Prerequisites: STAT 266, or STAT 235 and consent of instructor.
STAT 371 Probability and Stochastic Processes =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Problem solving of classical probability questions, random walk, gambler’s ruin, Markov chains, branching processes. Selected topics of the instructor’s choice. Prerequisite: STAT 265.
STAT 372 Mathematical Statistics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Laws of large numbers, weak convergence, some asymptotic results, delta method, maximum likelihood estimation, testing, UMP tests, LR tests, nonparametric methods (sign test, rank test), robustness, statistics and their sensitivity properties, prior and posterior distributions, Bayesian inference, conjugate priors, Bayes estimators. Prerequisites: STAT 266.
STAT 378 Applied Regression Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Simple linear regression analysis, inference on regression parameters, residual analysis, prediction intervals, weighted least squares. Multiple regression analysis, inference about regression parameters, multicollinearity and its effects, indicator variables, selection of independent variables. Non-linear regression. Prerequisites: STAT 266, or STAT 235 and consent of instructor.
STAT 432 Survival Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survival models, model estimation from complete and incomplete data samples, parametric survival models with concomitant variables, estimation of life tables from general population data. Prerequisite: STAT 372 and 378.
STAT 441 Applied Statistical Methods for Data Mining =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-1). Principles of statistical model building and analysis applied in linear and generalized linear models and illustrated through multivariate methods such as repeated measures, principal components, and supervised and unsupervised classification. Prerequisites: STAT 368 or 378.
STAT 453 Risk Theory =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classical ruin theory, individual risk models, collective risk models, models for loss severity: parametric models, tail behavior, models for loss frequency, mixed Poisson models; compound Poisson models, convolutions and recursive methods, probability and moment generating functions. Prerequisite: STAT 371.
STAT 471 Probability I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Probability spaces, algebra of events. Elements of combinatorial analysis. Conditional probability, stochastic independence. Special discrete and continuous distributions. Random variables, moments, transformations. Basic limit theorems. Prerequisite: STAT 371.
STAT 479 Time Series Analysis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Stationary series, spectral analysis, models in time series: autoregressive, moving average, ARMA and ARIMA. Smoothing series, computational techniques and computer packages for time series. Note: This course may be offered only in alternate years. Prerequisite: STAT 372 and 378.
STAT 499 Research Project Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-1s-6). This course provides students in Specialization and Honors programs an opportunity to pursue research in statistics under the direction of a member of the Department. Course requirements include at least one oral presentation and a written final report. Students interested in taking this course should contact the course coordinator two months in advance. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Prerequisites: a 300-level STAT course and consent of the course coordinator.
Graduate Courses
STAT 501 Directed Study I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles of experimental design, completely randomized design-one way ANOVA and ANCOVA. Randomized block design. Latin square design, Multiple comparisons. Nested designs. Factorial experiments. Each student will give a written report and seminar presentation highlighting statistical methods used in a research project. Prerequisites: STAT 252 or 337 or equivalent and a course in linear algebra. Note: Cannot be used for credit towards a graduate program in Statistics.
STAT 502 Directed Study II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Simple linear regression analysis, inference on regression parameters, residual analysis, prediction intervals, weighted least squares. Multiple regression analysis, inference about regression parameters, multicollinearity and its effects, indicator variables, selection of independent variables. Non-linear regression. Each student will give a written report and seminar presentation highlighting statistical methods used in a research project. Prerequisite: STAT 337 or equivalent and a course in linear algebra. Note: Cannot be used for credit towards a graduate program in Statistics.
STAT 503 Directed Study III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Theory and applications of time series modelling, stationarity, autocorrelation. Spectral properties, filtering. Box-Jenkins models, seasonality. Each student will give a written report and seminar presentation highlighting statistical methods used in a research project. Prerequisite: STAT 372 and 378 or consent of Instructor.
STAT 504 Directed Study IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic sampling schemes for finite populations: simple random sampling, stratified random sampling, systematic sampling and cluster sampling. Unequal probability sampling. Ratio and regression estimators. Prerequisite: A course in Statistical Inference at the 300 level or permission from the instructor. Note: Cannot be used for credit towards a graduate program in Statistics.
STAT 505 Directed Study V Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Principles of statistical model building and analysis applied in linear and generalized linear models and illustrated through multivariate methods such as repeated measures, principal components, and supervised and unsupervised classification. Each student will give a written report and seminar presentation highlighting statistical methods used in a research project. Prerequisites: STAT 501, 502 or equivalent. Note: Cannot be used for credit towards a thesis- based graduate program in Statistics.
STAT 512 Techniques of Mathematics for Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to mathematical techniques commonly used in theoretical Statistics, with applications. Applications of diagonalization results for real symmetric matrices, and of continuity, differentiation, Riemann- Stieltjes integration and multivariable calculus to the theory of Statistics including least squares estimation, generating functions, distribution theory. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
STAT 532 Survival Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Survival and hazard functions, censoring, truncation. Non-parametric, parametric and semi-parametric approaches to survival analysis including Kaplan-Meier estimation and Cox’s proportional hazards model. Prerequisite: STAT 372 or consent of Department.
STAT 553 Risk Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Classical ruin theory, individual risk models, collective risk models, models for loss severity: parametric models, tail behavior, models for loss frequency, mixed Poisson models; compound Poisson models, convolutions and recursive methods, probability and moment generating functions. Prerequisite: STAT 371 or equivalent. Note: Cannot be used for credit towards a thesis-based graduate program in the Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences.
STAT 561 Sample Survey Methodology Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Review of basic sampling schemes: simple random sampling, and stratified random sampling, and systematic sampling. Multistage sampling schemes. Estimation of nonlinear parameters: ratios, regression coefficients, and correlation coefficients. Variance estimation techniques: linearization, BRR, jackknife, and bootstrap. Selected topics: model-based estimation, regression analysis from complex survey data. Relevant computer packages. Prerequisites: STAT 361, 372, 471.
STAT 562 Discrete Data Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Sampling models and methods of inference for discrete data. Maximum likelihood estimation for complete contingency tables, measures of association and agreement. Goodness-of-fit. Incomplete tables. Analysis of square tables; symmetry and marginal homogeneity. Model selection and closeness of fit; practical aspects. Chi-square tests for categorical data from complex surveys. Prerequisite: STAT 372 or 471.
STAT 566 Methods of Statistical Inference Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to the theory of statistical inference. Topics to include exponential families and general linear models, likelihood, sufficiency, ancillarity, interval and point estimation, asymptotic approximations. Optional topics as time allows, may include Bayesian methods, Robustness, resampling techniques. This course is intended primarily for MSc students. Prerequisite: STAT 471 or consent of Department.
STAT 568 Design and Analysis of Experiments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The general linear model. Fully randomized designs, one-way layout, multiple comparisons. Block designs, Latin squares. Factorial designs confounding, fractions. Nested designs, randomization restrictions. Response surface methodology. Analysis of covariance. Prerequisite: STAT 368 and a 400-level STAT course.
STAT 571 Probability and Measure Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Measure and integration, Laws of Large Numbers, convergence of probability measures. Conditional expectation as time permits. Prerequisites: STAT 471 and STAT 512 or their equivalents.
STAT 575 Multivariate Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The multivariate normal distribution, multivariate regression and analysis of variance, classification, canonical correlation, principal components, factor analysis. Prerequisite: STAT 372 and STAT 512.
STAT 578 Regression Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Multiple linear regression, ordinary and generalized least squares, partial and multiple correlation. Regression diagnostics, collinearity, model building. Nonlinear regression. Selected topics: robust and nonparametric regression, measurement error models. Prerequisites: STAT 378 and a 400-level statistics course.
STAT 580 Stochastic Processes Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Elements of stochastic processes. Discrete and continuous time Markov Chains; Birth and Death processes. Branching processes. Brownian Motion. General Stationary and Markov processes. Examples. Prerequisite: STAT 471 or consent of Instructor.
STAT 590 Statistical Consulting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Data analysis, problem solving, oral communication with clients, issues in planning experiments and collecting data; practical aspects of consulting and report writing. Corequisite: STAT 568 and 578 or their equivalents.
STAT 600 Reading in Statistics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students will be supervised by an individual staff member to participate in areas of research interest of that staff member. Students can register only with the permission of the Chair of the Department in special circumstances. Will not be counted toward the minimum course requirement for graduate credits.
STAT 664 Advanced Statistical Inference Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Modern methods of statistical inference. Various versions of likelihood: conditional, marginal, integrated, profile, partial, empirical. Estimating equations. Semi-parametric models. Foundational issues. Prerequisites: STAT 512 and 566.
STAT 665 Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Inference Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Approximation techniques and asymptotic methods in statistics. Topics may include second and higher order expansions, asymptotics of likelihood based estimation and testing. Edgeworth expansions, exponential tilting, asymptotic relative efficiency, U-, M-, L-, and R-estimation. Prerequisites: STAT 566 or 664 and 512 or the equivalent.
STAT 900 Directed Research Project Œ6 (fi 12) (variable, unassigned). Open only to students taking the MSc non- thesis option in statistics.
STAT 901 Practicum in Statistics I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, unassigned). Open only to students taking the MSc non-thesis option in Statistics.
STAT 902 Practicum in Statistics II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, unassigned). Open only to students taking the MSc non-thesis option in Statistics.
#
Strategic Management and Organization
SMO
Department of Strategic Management and Organization Faculty of Business
Undergraduate Courses
SMO 200 Introduction to Management for Non-Business Students Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an understanding of the behavior of individuals and groups within the context of the business organization. Topics covered include organizational structure, culture, individual differences, personality, motivation, leadership, groups, decision making, power, politics, conflict, careers, stress, and organizational change. Not to be taken by students with credit in SMO 101, 201, 301 or 310. Not for credit in the Bachelor of Commerce program.
SMO 301 Behavior in Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Provides an understanding of the behavior of individuals in organizations. Draws from psychology, sociology, organization theory and covers topics such as personality, motivation, leadership, communication, conflict, and group dynamics. Prerequisite: Not open to students in the Faculty of Business. Open only to students from other faculties where the course is a requirement. Not to be taken by students with credit in SMO 200, 201 or 310.
SMO 310 Introduction to Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to the behavioral, political and organizational dynamics of managerial practice. Topics include management theory, social responsibility, ethics, motivation, decision making, leadership, organizational structure, and strategy. Not to be taken by students with credit in SMO 200 or 301. Open only to students in the Faculty of Business. Not to be taken by students with credit in SMO 200, 201 or 301.
SMO 311 HRM: Managing the Work Force in Canada Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is a general overview of human resource management issues in organizations. It focuses on reward systems, the design of work, legal issues, union-management relationships, staffing, and training and development. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 321 Introduction to Strategic Management and Organization Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Explores why organizations such as McDonalds, Northern Telecom, Bennetton, Wal-Mart and the University of Alberta use different patterns of organization. Examines the political and behavioral dynamics of management decision making. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 322 Theory of Organizational Behaviour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Students who have taken introductory courses in the area will study in greater depth and detail theories of how people work in organizations. These include theories of motivation, leadership, communication, decision making, groups, conflict, change, and others selected by the instructor to cover new ways of thinking about people and organizations. Lecture, case study, and group work will normally be used. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310.
SMO 330 Introduction to Entrepreneurship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is an interdisciplinary course for students interested in developing an idea for a new product or service into a market reality and an investable story. This course is about developing the analytical and conceptual skills required to assess the potential for a new venture. Working on a team composed of students from across different faculties, students will generate an idea, use business modeling techniques to “flesh out” that idea and define a venture opportunity, move through the customer research and development process in order to assess how to improve their new venture concept, and “pitch” their idea. Topics covered in this course will include: idea generation, business- model development, market definition, customer discovery, competitive analysis, and resource development. Open to students in any Faculty with the consent of the Department. Not open to students in first year.
SMO 402 Management Skills for Supervisors and Leaders Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to increase understanding of leadership roles and skill in exercising those roles. These include team building, mentoring, managing conflict, delegating, managing participative decision making, creative problem solving, and time and stress management. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 404 Interpersonal Communication and Team Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides an understanding of interpersonal (or face-to-face) communication process and presents opportunities for personal skill development. Students should expect to engage in role play and to receive feedback on their personal style of communication. Topics include team communication, supervisory-subordinate relationships, influence and persuasion, conflict management, and performance appraisal. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 405 Gender Issues in Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the ways in which gender, personal characteristics and organizational practices interact in influencing women’s and men’s experiences in work settings. Among the issues discussed are gender differences in career motivation and commitment, leadership skills and ability, and conflicts between professional and personal responsibilities. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 406 Ethical Issues in Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course assists students in developing and refining their personal ethical frameworks by examining issues commonly facing members of business and government organizations. A wide range of issues will be explored including discrimination, product and worker safety, environmental impacts, insider trading, and employee privacy and rights. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 407 Effective Team Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Modern organizations are increasingly seeing their ability to succeed as tied to their ability to better utilize human potential for innovation and creativity, primarily through the increased use of teams and small groups. Teamwork skills are required with increasing frequency, and the ability to build high performing teams is a key management competency. This includes work teams, project teams, and virtual teams. This course will focus on the factors required to transform a group of people into a high performing team. The course will integrate theory and practical skills. Students will learn how to identify healthy and unhealthy team dynamics, and explore team development activities and interventions to improve team performance. Course topics will include: effective team communication, team building, leadership and social influence, decision making processes in teams, conflict management, motivating and teams, virtual teams, and group processes. Students will be encouraged to demonstrate practical skills as well as academic learning. Students should be prepared to contribute to role plays, case studies, class presentations, virtual group experiences, and personal style assessments. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310.
SMO 411 Alternative Dispute Resolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Conflict is a part of life which we all encounter. Disagreements occur naturally between friends, co-workers, spouses, employer and employees, organizations, and nations. Conflict is both natural and positive if handled well, but can be destructive if handled badly. This course provides detailed hands-on practical experience with various methods of conflict resolution, especially mediation (third-party assistance) and negotiation. The course concentrates as well on the interpersonal communication skills, including assertiveness, which make effective conflict resolution possible. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310.
SMO 412 Effective Negotiations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a comprehensive study of negotiation theory and practice. A negotiation simulation is conducted to provide an understanding of how theory translates into practice. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 413 Rights in the Work Place Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a comprehensive study of rights in the work place. It examines principles of human resource management as guided by statutes and case law by courts and administrative tribunals. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 414 Work Force Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course examines how a company interacts with the labor market to ensure that it has the right number and skill mix of employees. Part of the course involves a field research project in which students critique the work force plan of a local company. Pre- or corequisite: SMO 311. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 415 Staffing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course is focused on the philosophy and procedures used in obtaining and maintaining an efficient work force. Topics include recruitment, selection and training. Pre- or corequisite: SMO 311. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 416 Performance Management and Rewards Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course focuses on how organizations create and operate a performance management system. It presents an overview of current issues in the field, such as performance evaluation, compensation planning, internal consistency, external competitiveness, individual equity, and benefits. Pre- or corequisite: SMO 311. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 417 Managing the Work Force: International Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course comparatively explores different techniques of human resource management (HRM) used in Canada, the USA, Japan, Sweden, Germany, and France. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 418 Public Sector Employee Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course examines public sector employee relations in the context of governments, public service commissions, trade unions, and administrative tribunals. It highlights public sector/private sector differences and includes a simulation of public sector labor contract negotiations. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth year students.
SMO 423 Power and Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to aspects of organizational life often omitted in business courses - the role of humor, gossip, emotion and sex; the organization of time and space; the nature of the body and the construction of organizational identities - and consider their significance for understanding contemporary organizational and human resources practices. Prerequisite: Open to third- and fourth-year students only.
SMO 427 Advising Family Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In this course students will examine some of the most salient issues facing family businesses from the perspective of a professional advisor. Case studies and recent research will be used to demonstrate how to address challenges facing family businesses in practice (e.g. communication, governance and succession issues, family conflicts and nepotism). From the perspective of advisors, students will analyze the unique competitive advantages and disadvantages of family businesses. Guest speakers who are advising family businesses or who are family business members will share their experiences relative to working with, or in, family businesses. The course will be highly interactive and students will be encouraged to discuss how to best address the weaknesses of family firms while simultaneously building their strengths. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310 or permission of the instructor.
SMO 428 Managing Family Enterprise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to improve managerial knowledge and practice through improved recognition and understanding of the significance of family firms and of the unique challenges they face. The course is designed primarily for individuals who a) are members of a family with established business interests; b) might find themselves working for family controlled firms; c) might find themselves working in a professional capacity with family controlled firms in roles such as accountant, lawyer, banker or consultant. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310 or permission of the instructor.
SMO 430 Introduction to Small Business Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focus is specifically on issues related to the establishment of small business enterprises and particular issues related to managing them. This course employs the knowledge already acquired in the Undergraduate Program disciplines (OA, Marketing, Finance, Accounting, etc.) and applies it to case analysis and to the study of existing small businesses in Alberta. Students should be prepared to visit small business sites and to prepare case analyses of their management systems. Prerequisites: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 431 New Venture Creation and Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores how small businesses are created and operated. Topics include the entrepreneurial process, opportunity recognition, business planning, mobilizing resources and organization creation. Prerequisite: FIN 301, and SMO 201, 301 or 310.
SMO 432 Managing for Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines what quality management is, how it is used to improve performance, and how an organization can transform itself to a quality management orientation. In addition the history of management thought related to quality management including that of prominent figures such as Taylor, Deming, and Juvan is explored. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 433 Managing Organizational Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines organization change, e.g. how organizations make transitions from one state to another. There is also a focus on understanding how management goes about changing corporate culture, organization structure and management systems. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 435 Managing International Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course explores issues related to managing businesses that operate in an international content. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 437 Managing Culture Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course has two aims: 1) to explore how organizational and work group cultures affect the management of an organization; and 2) to explore how national culture impacts management practice and ‘doing business’ in foreign settings. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open to third- and fourth-year students.
SMO 438 Managing Public, Not-for-Profit Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Many management ideas and practices are derived from private, for-profit organizations. This course examines some of the issues confronting management in the public, voluntary and not-for-profit sectors, for example, health, education, charities, churches, cultural organization and the arts, community groups, aid agencies, etc. It addresses the issues of to what extent and how management in these types of organizations is different from the dominant private sector view of management; the extent to which practices from one sector may be adopted by another, and pressures which lead in this direction, through, for example, funding agencies. Specific issues such as the management of volunteers will also be considered. Prerequisite: SMO 201, 301 or 310.
SMO 441 Strategy and Innovation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines top management decisions and emphasizes the development of business and corporate strategy. It integrates the management principles studied in the business core using a series of business cases. The course will have a special focus on innovation and innovative ways of competing and creating value. Guest Faculty members and executives will participate. Prerequisites: FIN 301; MARK 301; and SMO 201, 301 or 310. Open only to students in the Faculty of Business.
SMO 442 International Family Enterprise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). International Family Enterprise provides an opportunity for students to investigate issues related to family enterprise in international contexts. Using a combination of theoretical information, written case studies, and presentations from guest speakers the course studies family firms from the perspective of family, ownership and business. The course allows students the opportunity to investigate how non-family businesses can best deal with family firms in other countries. The course looks at family firms operating outside Canada and the US, as well as Canadian family firms with international operations.
SMO 470 Leadership Lecture Series Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course will provide students with an opportunity to hear leaders speak in a small group setting. Speakers will be leaders in academic life, business, military, professions, government, and the volunteer, cultural and non-profit communities as examples. Leadership in all areas of life will be explored. The lecture series will also allow the School to organize and offer innovative learning experiences for the students that will enhance the cohort “esprit de corps” and learning. (This course is normally restricted to students enrolled in Credit Certificate in Leadership.)
SMO 471 Leadership Seminar Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This course is designed as an intensive examination of the role of the leader in an organization, the tasks and responsibilities of the leader, the dynamic processes in any organization, and developing leadership skills. (This course is normally restricted to students enrolled in Credit Certificate in Leadership.)
SMO 488 Selected Topics in Organization Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Normally restricted to third- and fourth-year Business students. Prerequisites: SMO 201, 301 or 310 or consent of Department. Additional prerequisites may be required.
SMO 495 Individual Research Project I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
SMO 496 Individual Research Project II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: SMO 495, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
SMO 497 Individual Research Project III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Special Study for advanced undergraduates. Prerequisites: SMO 496, consent of the Instructor and Assistant Dean, Undergraduate Program.
Graduate Courses
SMO 500 Managing People Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduces students to organizational behavior (OB) and human resource management (HRM), and how to generate energy and commitment in employees. Examines options relevant to staffing, performance management, reward systems, leadership, motivation, decision making, communication, labor relations, and current issues in the field of management. Credit will not be given for SMO 500 when ORG A 500 or 503 or 504 have been completed.
SMO 502 Organization Strategy/Managing Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The first part of this course examines the formation of business strategy. It recognizes the complexities and messiness of strategy formation and explores how organizations actually develop strategies. The second part examines the evolution, determinants, and relevance of alternative ways of organizing. Contemporary ideas (e.g. re-engineering, the learning organization, virtual organizations) are critically reviewed. Not open to students who have completed SMO 610. Prerequisite: SMO 500.
SMO 530 The Entrepreneurial Mindset and Innovation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is an interdisciplinary course for graduate students interested in understanding and cultivating an entrepreneurial mindset. The class will explore the notion that creativity and innovation can be applied across many spheres of life - including in academic research, nonprofits, government, big companies, and small start-ups. Note: Open to students in any Faculty with the consent of the Department. Students in the Faculty of Business may not take this course for credit.
SMO 600 From Science to Business: Translational and Entrepreneurial Challenges Œ3 (fi 6) (variable, 3-0-0). This is a project-focused course on technology entrepreneurship and translation. At the core of the course will be `real life’ projects that require business development analysis and assessment. Based on their projects, students will be expected to produce technology commercialization plans as a key output for the course. In addition, the course will address key strategic and policy issues related to enhancing technology entrepreneurship at the science-business interface. Topics covered include open innovation systems, the challenges associated with the bridging the gap between science and business, and the strategic management technology translation and entrepreneurship. Prerequisite: SMO 659 or permission from the MBA Office.
SMO 601 Innovation and Sustainability: The Cleantech Revolution Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The clean technology and renewables course is a course designed to fit with three areas of graduate study: technology development and transfer, strategy, and sustainability. In this course, we will begin with an examination renewable energy industries (solar, water, wind, etc.) and clean technologies focused on waste and recycling. Clean and green strategies will be identified and discussed, using specific examples from our international clean technology research and database. At the end of the course, students will present either a project with a local clean technology company project or a case analysis of a key clean technology company of interest.
SMO 603 Managing Innovation Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an introduction to practical applications to manage the innovation process in established companies. The focus will be on building and exploring clear innovation strategies, as well as understanding successful innovative organizations. This course is intended to provide participants with an overview of the management structures, processes and roles for successfully managing and participating in the management of innovation activities.
SMO 610 The Manager as Strategist Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This is a two week intensive course designed to develop critical thinking skills for executives. The course provides an overview of the substantive areas of management including human resources, leadership, organizational behaviour and strategy skills. Restricted to students in the FastTrack MBA for Business Graduates and the Master of Accounting. Credit will not be given for both SMO 610 and SMO 502.
SMO 612 Effective Negotiations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course is a comprehensive study of negotiation theory and practice. A negotiation simulation is conducted to provide an understanding of how theory translates into practice.
SMO 617 Managing the Work Force: International Perspectives Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This Human Resource Management course comparatively explores different systems of human resources management (HRM) that are used in Canada, the USA, Japan, Sweden, Germany, and France, and their implications for firm competitiveness. Throughout the course, the North American experience serves as the backdrop or frame of reference for analytical discussions.
SMO 627 Advising Family Business Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). In this course students will examine some of the most salient issues facing family businesses from the perspective of a professional advisor. Case studies and recent research will be used to demonstrate how to address fundamental challenges facing family businesses in practice (e.g. communication, governance and succession issues, family conflicts and nepotism). From the perspective of advisors, students will analyze the unique competitive advantages - and disadvantages - of family businesses. Guest speakers who are advising family businesses or who are family business members will share their unique experiences relative to working with, or in, family businesses. The course will be highly interactive and students will be encouraged to discuss how to best address the weaknesses of family firms while simultaneously building their strengths.
SMO 628 Managing Family Enterprise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Designed to improve managerial knowledge and practice through improved recognition and understanding of the significance of family firms and of the unique challenges they face. Designed primarily for individuals who a) are members of a family with established business interests; b) might find themselves working for family controlled firms; c) might find themselves working in a professional capacity with family controlled firms in roles such as accountant, lawyer, banker or consultant.
SMO 631 New Venture Creation and Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course concentrates on the development of a new enterprise and the management of an existing small business. Casework and projects enable students to assess the opportunities, risks, and capabilities necessary for entrepreneurial success. The course emphasizes managerial and strategic problems during the early years of business formation and growth, including business planning. The course emphasizes the interface between theory and practice.
SMO 632 Managing for Quality Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines what quality management is, how it is used to improve performance, and how an organization can transform itself to a quality management orientation. In addition, the history of management thought related to quality management including that of prominent figures such as Taylor, Deming, and Juran is explored.
SMO 633 Managing Organizational Change Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines organization change, e.g. how organizations make transitions from one state to another. There is also a focus on understanding how management goes about changing corporate culture, organization structure and management systems.
SMO 635 Managing International Enterprises Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). International enterprises are for-profit businesses and nonprofit organizations which actively coordinate their operations sited in multiple countries. Top managers of international enterprises must ensure that their organizations simultaneously adapt to differences in external contexts around the world and increase internal coordination, efficiency, and innovation on a worldwide basis. Students will be put in the role of practicing top managers who are facing challenges, making decisions, and providing leadership in complex, multicultural contexts. Topics may include: entry decisions; aligning strategy, structure, and process; globalization; international strategic alliances; and sustainability. Prerequisites: SMO 500.
SMO 636 Management Consulting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an introduction to the management consulting industry. It is primarily intended for those considering a possible career as a management consultant and for those looking to pursue an Internship with a consulting firm or a position with VGC. First, the course outlines the history, regulation, business models and competitive structure of the industry. Because the industry is changing quite rapidly, attention will be given to the dynamics of the industry’s business models and competitive structure. Second, the course introduces participants to key practices in the consulting process, with specific attention to the analytical and diagnostic approach to the preparation of proposals and management of engagements.
SMO 637 Managing Not-For-Profit Organizations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Many management ideas and practices are derived from large, private, for-profit corporations. This course examines some of the issues confronting management in the not-for-profit sector, for example, health, education, charities, social/human services, and the arts. It addresses the issues of to what extent and how management in these types of organizations is different from the dominant private sector view of management, and how these practices are applied in the not for profit sector. Specific issues such as the management of volunteers, boards, and resource development programs are considered.
SMO 638 Corporate Sustainability Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines business strategies for sustainable development. Business sustainability is defined as managing the “triple bottom line” - designing mission driven enterprises that provide a thriving future for business, society and the planet. To achieve this, managers must adopt a fresh understanding of the role of the business enterprise. The course will draw from successful sustainability efforts of leading business organizations, both locally and internationally, by identifying key success factors that encourage sustainable business practices. It will also place current understandings of sustainability in a wider context by exploring the historical roots of current sustainability practices and examining their implications for key stakeholders of the business enterprise.
SMO 639 The Process of Making Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Emphasizes a systematic and comprehensive approach to the study of developing and implementing public policy within the context of Canadian society. This course explores both the decision-making process, and such factors as the separation of powers between levels of government, electoral politics, interest groups, media and government bureaucracy as they influence the making of public policy.
SMO 640 Implementing Public Policy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Examines how public policy is implemented in organizations. Topic areas will include: using new knowledge to develop policy; influencing policy; and the role of managers in effectively implementing policy. There will be a strong focus on how public sector managers can effectively design and implement change strategies that take into consideration the organizational structure, systems, leadership, culture and politics. Combines classroom discussion of theoretical concepts with practical application in organizational settings.
SMO 641 Business Strategy Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines top management decisions and emphasizes the development of business and corporate strategy. It integrates the management principles studied in the business core using a series of business cases. Guest Faculty members and executives will participate. Prerequisite: All required Year one MBA core courses.
SMO 642 International Family Enterprise Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). International Family Enterprise provides an opportunity for students to investigate issues related to family enterprise in international contexts. Using a combination of theoretical information, written case studies, and presentations from guest speakers the course studies family firms from the perspective of family, ownership and business. As well, since family business is a prevalent organizational form throughout the world, the course allows students the opportunity to investigate how non-family businesses can best deal with family firms in other countries. The course looks at family firms operating outside Canada and the US, as well as Canadian family firms with international operations and addresses the following general questions: What are the key organizational and strategic issues for family businesses in other countries? How can we best understand the combination of family, ownership and business issues in international family firms? How can Canadian family firms best organize in order to compete internationally?
SMO 643 Strategic Management in the Public Sector Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Strategic management in the public sector comprises defining public value, building consensus and support, making decisions, deploying organizational capacity to implement, and managing performance to achieve the desired mission and goals. Addresses the unique complexities, ambiguities and messiness of strategic management in the public sector.
SMO 644 Public Sector Leadership Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Nearly all research on leadership has focused on the private sector. This course will concentrate on the unique features of leadership in the public and non-profit sectors. The course will examine the senior management structures in the different orders of government but the focus will be transformative leadership in areas of current policy interest including examples from environment, health, education, and social services. Prerequisite: SMO 652.
SMO 645 Social Entrepreneurship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Corporate social and environmental responsibility is an important strategic consideration for companies around the world. The relationship a business has with both government and the larger public is integral to its success, reputation, and day-to-day activities. This course offers a practical introduction to social entrepreneurship and addresses entrepreneurship, innovation, and corporate social responsibility. The course focuses on key concepts in the field of social entrepreneurship and social enterprise, including organizational learning, sustainability, philanthropy, commercialization, and profit and nonprofit development. It also presents cases that illustrate these concepts in practical contexts. Ideas and skills learned in this course will better enable students to; play a role in shaping socially responsible businesses; develop a genuinely sustainable business enterprise; infuse non-profit organizations with a spirit of social innovation and practical financial sustainability; assist in influencing future government actions.
SMO 648 International Family Business Study Tour Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Combines lectures at the University of Alberta with an on-site study tour to a foreign country. The study tour component is normally for a one-to-two week period, during which students participate in company tours and lectures, to develop an appreciation for family business and entrepreneurship in an international context. Students are usually expected to complete projects or case studies relating to the country under study. Check with MBA office for enrolment restrictions. Credit will not be given for both SMO 648 and any other MBA study tour to the same destination. Students may receive credit for only two of the following three courses: BUS 648, BUEC 648, SMO 648.
SMO 651 Project Management for Consulting Professionals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is an introduction to project management for the management consulting industry. This course is designed for management consulting professionals, current and prospective, and will explore the dynamics of project management fundamentals. The focus will be on managing the constraints faced by a project manager in any project: budgets, human resources, time frames, changing specifications, and quality. This course will examine techniques for establishing project objectives, developing deliverables, managing scope, developing work plans, managing and mitigating risks, issues and challenges as well as explore client management, profitability, and project close-out techniques.
SMO 652 Leadership Skills Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The purpose of this course is to increase the student’s understanding of leadership roles and skill in exercising those roles. These include team building, mentoring, managing conflict, delegating, managing participative decision making, creative problem solving, and time and stress management.
SMO 656 High Technology Business Development Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to the skills and components involved in the development of a high technology based business. Emphasis will be on business development at the interface of science and technology product development, including challenges facing new start-ups. Key business development topics include product development, market creation, building a management team, intellectual property, financing, ownership and exit strategy. Students will experience business development through case studies, presentations and class discussions.
SMO 657 Interpersonal Communication and Team Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course provides the understanding of interpersonal (or face-to-face) communication process and presents opportunities for personal skill development. Students should expect to engage in role plays and to receive feedback on their personal style of communication. Topics include team communication supervisory-subordinate relationships, influence and persuasion, conflict management, and performance appraisal.
SMO 659 The Strategic Management of Innovation and Entrepreneurship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course addresses business principles at the interface of organization and technological change. It is intended for future managers and entrepreneurs, and provides the strategic frameworks needed to manage and profit from technological innovation. This course is designed in three parts, starting with an examination of innovation in the context of historical patterns of technological change. Second, it will address the organizational challenges in creating and managing innovation. To close, the course will integrate this knowledge and introduce strategies for commercialization and business development. Case studies and a final project will create opportunities to apply the frameworks.
SMO 686 Selected Topics in Behavioral Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Topics may vary from year to year. Students should check with the MBA Office for pre/corequisites of specific sections.
SMO 701 Seminar in Organization Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course introduces students to the major schools of thought in organization and management theory. It considers the development of the field, major and foundational works in these schools of thought, and provides a cognitive map with which to evaluate contemporary research and debates. At the end of the course the student will have an understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of each major perspective. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in ORG A 701.
SMO 702 Seminar in Human Behavior in Organization Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This seminar examines theory and original research within the field of organizational behavior. The course covers a range of topics, including job performance, work attitudes (e.g., organizational commitment, job satisfaction), motivation, trust, justice, individual differences (e.g., personality), team structure and processes, power, leadership, and organizational culture. The primary emphasis is on the field’s classic, ground-breaking and/or provocative articles. Overall, the course exposes students to current research thinking and strategies within the field. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program at the University of Alberta or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in ORG A 702.
SMO 703 Seminar in Strategic Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines the current state of knowledge in strategic management. Topics may include the sources of competitive advantage, the role of industry evolution and technology, the organization of top management, and managerial decision-making and cognition. The course introduces students to alternative theoretical perspectives and available empirical evidence related to these topics. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in ORG A 703.
SMO 704 Individual Research Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students.
SMO 705 Seminar in Contemporary Issues Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course is designed to provide a holistic viewpoint on the life and work of a management professor. As students move through their doctoral program and into their first academic jobs, there are several skills and understandings that will be important for them to develop, with the ultimate goal of making their careers ones that are fulfilling. This course helps ground the students in a broad range of the basic skills they will build on over their careers. To that end, this course focuses on professional development, including research, teaching, presenting, and being a positive contributing member of the academe. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by student with credit in ORG A 705.
SMO 707 Seminar in Special Organization Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course examines special domain-related topics currently popular within organizational research. Topics will vary from one seminar to the next depending on instructor expertise, student interest and advances within the field. Illustrative topics include (but are not limited to) entrepreneurship, family enterprise and technology commercialization. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in ORG A 707.
SMO 708 Seminar in Industrial Relations Foundations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Readings topics will include industrial relations systems theory, historical development and theories of the labor movement, comparative industrial relations systems, and collective bargaining theory. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Business PhD Program Director is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in IND R 701.
SMO 709 Seminar in Human Resource Management Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This seminar examines theory and research relevant to the employment relationship, including attracting, selecting and retaining people, socializing them about cultural values, designing jobs, and setting up reward and feedback structures, all of which affect the employees’ ability and motivation to contribute to the organization. HRM spans micro, meso, and macro levels of analysis and thus occupies an important point of intersection with other fields in management, the linkages of which are a focal point of study in this course. Prerequisite: Registration in Business PhD Program or written permission of instructor. Approval of the Associate Dean, Business PhD Program, is also required for non-PhD students. Not to be taken by students with credit in HRM 703.
SMO 810 The Manager as Strategist Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 1 week). A week-long intensive course. Identifying and developing the human resources, leadership, and strategy skills essential for today’s successful executive. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
SMO 820 Managing Human Resources Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding interpersonal behavior within organizations; assessing and developing interpersonal effectiveness both as a leader and a team member. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
SMO 860 Management of Technology/Innovation Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding basic science and technology; integrating new technology into operations; managing research and development. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
SMO 870 Corporate Strategy Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding corporate strategy and processes to mobilize resources to achieve corporate objectives; industry and competitive analysis. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
SMO 875 Leadership Œ3 (fi 32) (either term, 3-0-0). Understanding the unique perspectives, tasks, and responsibilities of the executive in providing leadership to the organization; dynamic processes of organizations; and developing leadership skills. Restricted to Executive MBA students only.
#
Surgery
SURG
Department of Surgery
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Undergraduate Courses
SURG 546 General Surgery Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 6 weeks). Student internship for students registered in the MD program.
SURG 556 Specialty Surgery Œ4 (fi 8) (either term, 4 weeks). Student internship for students registered in the MD Program.
Graduate Courses
SURG 530 Directed Reading in Biology and Medicine Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Reading and study of topics in biomedical research of relevance to the student’s interest under direction of one or more faculty members.
SURG 555 Microvascular Surgery Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 40 hours). The course reviews the fundamentals of microvascular surgery, and then allows supervised instruction in techniques including dissection, vascular anastomosis, mobilization of free flaps of vascularized tissue, transplantation and vein grafts. This course is intended for individuals with an extensive background in the theory and practice of surgery such as Surgery Residents and experienced researchers in the field. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
SURG 570 From Basic to Clinical Immunology Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 1-0-0). This course will begin with the fundamentals of basic immunology to provide the basis for understanding subsequent clinical immunology lectures. Invited basic science and clinical professionals will also give a lecture on the application of immunology in clinical fields such as transplantation, immunodeficiency, and cancer, followed by a full class discussion. Topics will include: innate and acquired immunity, autoimmunity, transplantation immunology, immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity, tumor immunology, immunochemistry and vaccines. Common and new techniques used in Basic and Clinical Immunology research will also be covered. Intended for students with an advanced medical background. Prerequisite: consent of the Department.
SURG 600 Research Seminar Œ2 (fi 4) (two term, 0-1s-0). A weekly series of seminars on current research is held during Fall and Winter Terms. Graduate students must attend and make two presentations in this series.
#
Swedish
SWED
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a Swedish language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in a more advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also listings under Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Scandinavian (SCAND).
Undergraduate Courses
SWED 111 Beginners’ Swedish I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Designed to give basic practical skill in everyday spoken and written Swedish. The oral approach, using the laboratory, is followed. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in SWED 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Swedish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
SWED 112 Beginners’ Swedish II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 5-0-0). Prerequisite: SWED 111 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in SWED 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Swedish 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
SWED 211 Second-Year Swedish I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Reading and study of selected texts in Swedish literature and culture. Conversation and composition. Prerequisite: Swedish 30 (or equivalent) or SWED 112 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in SWED 200.
SWED 212 Second-Year Swedish II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Prerequisite: SWED 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in SWED 200.
#
Theatre Design
T DES
Department of Drama Faculty of Arts
For other courses in the Department of Drama see Drama Course listings.
Undergraduate Courses
T DES 170 Fundamentals of Stagecraft and Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Production techniques, construction, mechanics, lighting and design. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in Drama 279, 379 or 479.
T DES 171 Studio Techniques for Theatre Design Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-4L-0). Study and practice of the studio techniques employed in theatre design. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 371. Prerequisite: consent of department.
T DES 172 Technical Drawing for Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Studies in drafting and perspective drawing for the stage. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 270 or 471.
T DES 270 Theatre Design I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Study and practice of design for the theatre. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students or consent of department.
T DES 271 Computer Graphics for Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Study in practice of computer graphic techniques employed in theatre design. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students or consent of Department.
T DES 272 CAD for the Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Computer aided design for the theatre designer and technician. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 491
T DES 273 Production Techniques: Scene Painting Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Theory and techniques of the texturing and painting of scenery. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students, or consent of department. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 572 or 584.
T DES 274 Production Techniques: Advanced Scene Painting Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Prerequisite DRAMA 273. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students, or consent of department. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 572 or 585
T DES 275 History of Dress and Decor I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of style in western civilization from the ancients to the Renaissance. Prerequisite: consent of department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 375 or HECOL 150, 268 or 360.
T DES 278 Drawing Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). Development and application of drawing techniques with emphasis on drawing for the theatre. Note: A single-term course offered over two terms. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 370 Theatre Design II Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Further study and practice of design for the theatre. Prerequisite: DRAMA 270. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 372 3D CAD for the Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Exploration, practice and experimentation with 3D CAD for theatrical application. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students. Offered in alternate years.
T DES 373 Production Techniques: Lighting Design Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 4-2L-0). Theory and techniques of lighting design. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students, or consent of department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 372 or 384.
T DES 374 Production Techniques Advanced: Lighting Design Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Prerequisite: T DES 373. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students, or consent of department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 372 or 385.
T DES 375 History of Dress and Decor II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of style in western civilization from the Renaissance to the present. Prerequisite: consent of department. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 375 HECOL 150, 268 or 360.
T DES 376 Design Assistantship I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in assisting the designer. Corequisite: T DES 370. Note: A single-term course offered over two terms. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 473 or 493.
T DES 377 Production Design I Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in designing an element or elements of a production. Note: A single-term course offered over two terms. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 476.
T DES 378 Drawing II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-3L-0). Further development and application of drawing techniques with emphasis on drawing for the theatre. Note: A single-term course offered over two terms. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 470 Theatre Design III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). A specialized course for advanced students, designed to meet the needs of the individual. Prerequisite: T DES 370. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 570.
T DES 471 Portfolio Œ0 (fi 2) (two term, 0-1s-0). Portfolio assessment. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 571.
T DES 473 Production Techniques: Costume Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 0-6L-0). Theory and techniques of stage costuming. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students, or consent of department. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 472 or 484.
T DES 474 Production Techniques: Advanced Costume Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-6L-0). Prerequisite: T DES 473. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) and (Technical Theatre) students or consent of department. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 472 or 485.
T DES 475 Topics in the History of Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of design and scenography for the theatre.
T DES 476 Design Assistantship II Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in assistant designing. Corequisite T DES 470. Note: Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 477 Production Design II Œ3 (fi 6) (two term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in designing an element or elements of a production. Restricted to BFA Drama (Design) students. A single- term course offered over two terms. Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 576.
T DES 479 Practicum Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-9L-0). A practical extension of the production techniques courses, involving the student in the production process of main stage shows. Pre or corequisite: T DES 273, 373, or 473. Note: Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 579.
Graduate Courses
T DES 570 Advanced Theatre Design I Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 571 Advanced Studio Techniques for Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-4L-0). Study and practice of the studio techniques employed in theatre design. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 572 Advanced Technical Drawing for Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). Studies in drafting and perspective drawing for the stage. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 573 Advanced Scene Painting Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 575 History of Dress and Decor I Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of style in western civilization from the ancients to the Renaissance. Offered in alternate years.
T DES 576 Design Assistantship III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in assistant designing. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 577 Production Design III Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in designing an element or elements of a production. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 578 Advanced Drawing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Development and application of drawing techniques with emphasis on drawing for the theatre. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 579 Practicum Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-9L-0). A practical extension of the production techniques courses, involving the student in the production process of main stage shows. Pre- or corequisite: T DES 573, 673, or 773. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 580 Design for Directors Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3L-0). Corequisites: DRAMA 660, 661, 680 or 681. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Directing) students and MA Drama students (with consent of department). Not to be taken by students with credit in DRAMA 672.
T DES 670 Advanced Theatre Design II Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 671 Advanced Computer Graphics for Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Study in practice of computer graphic techniques employed in theatre design. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 672 Advanced CAD for the Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Computer aided design for the theatre designer and technician. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 673 Advanced Lighting Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 675 History of Dress and Decor II Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). A survey of style in western civilization from the Renaissance to the present. Offered in alternate years.
T DES 676 Design Assistantship IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in assistant designing. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 677 Production Design IV Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-0-6). Practical experience in designing an element or elements of a production. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 770 Advanced Theatre Design III Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 772 Advanced 3D CAD for the Theatre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-2). Exploration, practice and experimentation with 3D CAD for theatrical application. Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students. Offered in alternate years.
T DES 773 Advanced Costume Techniques Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-6L-0). Note: Restricted to MFA Drama (Design) students.
T DES 775 Advanced Topics in the History of Theatre Design Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). History of design and scenography for the theatre.
#
Thesis
THES
Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research
Graduate Courses
THES 901 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 2) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *1 for registration status and fee assessment purposes. Approval of the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research required.
THES 902 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 4) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *2 for registration status and fee assessment purposes. Approval of Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research required.
THES 903 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 6) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *3 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 904 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 8) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *4 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 905 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 10) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *5 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 906 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 12) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *6 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 907 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 14) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *7 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 908 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 16) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *8 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 909 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 18) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *9 for registration status and fee assessment purposes.
THES 910 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). For special purposes. Approval of Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research required.
THES 919 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *9 for registration status purposes. Requires payment of a set fee. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide section in the calendar.
THES 953 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Represents thesis research activity equivalent to *3 for registration status purposes. No instruction fees are assessed. Restricted to doctoral students registered in *3 in the preceding Spring or Summer term. Department and Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research consent required.
THES 956 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *6 for registration status purposes. No instruction fees are assessed. Restricted to doctoral students registered in *6 in the preceding Spring or Summer term. Department and Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research consent required.
THES 959 Thesis Research Œ0 (fi 0) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *9 for registration status purposes. No instruction fees are assessed. Restricted to doctoral students registered in *9 in the preceding Spring or Summer term. Department and Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research consent required.
THES 988 Thesis Research Œ9 (fi 18) (either term, unassigned). Represents research activity equivalent to *9 for registration status purposes. Restricted to graduate degree students who are conducting thesis research at another institution under a formal Institutional Agreement. Approval of the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research required.
#
Ukrainian
UKR
Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies Faculty of Arts
Notes
(1) The Department reserves the right to place students in the language course appropriate to their level of language skill.
(2) Placement tests may be administered in order to assess prior background. Students with a Ukrainian language background should consult a Department advisor. Such students may be granted advanced placement and directed to register in an advanced course more suitable to their level of ability. Students seeking to fulfill their Language Other than English requirement may begin at any one appropriate level, but must take the full *6 in one language.
(3) The Department will withhold credit from students completing courses for which prior background is deemed to make them ineligible. For example, 100-level courses are normally restricted to students with little or no prior knowledge in that language. Should a student with matriculation standing, or those possessing prior background (such as native speakers or those for whom it is their first language) register in the 100-level course, credit may be withheld.
(4) See also Modern Languages and Cultural Studies (MLCS) and Slavic and East European Studies (SLAV) listings, and INT D courses offered by the Faculty of Arts.
Undergraduate Courses
UKR 111 Beginners’ Ukrainian I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). For students with little or no background in Ukrainian, the course emphasizes oral communication while developing basic listening, reading and writing skills. Cultural practices are taught as in integral part of the language. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in UKR 100, or with native or near native proficiency, or with Ukrainian 30 or its equivalents in Canada and other countries.
UKR 112 Beginners’ Ukrainian II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-2). Prerequisite: UKR 111 or consent of the Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credits in UKR 100, or with native of near native proficiency, or with Ukrainian 30 or its equivalent in Canada and other countries.
UKR 211 The Ukrainian-speaking World I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Contemporary language and culture through newspapers, magazines, TV and the Internet. Prerequisite: Ukrainian 30 (or equivalent matriculation standing), or UKR 112, or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in UKR 150, 201, 202, 203, 204.
UKR 212 The Ukrainian-speaking World II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 4-0-0). Focus on elementary conversation and composition. Prerequisite: UKR 211 or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in UKR 150, 202, 204.
UKR 300 Ukrainian through its Living Culture I =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical language skills with a direct experience of Ukrainian life and culture in the Lviv environment. The language of instruction is Ukrainian. Prerequisite: UKR 212 or consent of Department.
UKR 303 Ukrainian in Context I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Conversation and writing through films, news items, short stories and plays. Prerequisite: UKR 212 (formerly 150, 202), or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in UKR 401 or 402.
UKR 304 Ukrainian in Context II =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: UKR 303 (formerly 401) or consent of Department. Note: not to be taken by students with credit in UKR 402.
UKR 324 Ukrainian Culture I =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Comparison among contemporary life in Ukraine today, Ukrainian Canadian culture, and traditional village life in the past. Focus is on everyday life and spiritual culture. Language of instruction is English. This course does not fulfil the language other than English requirement of the BA.
UKR 327 Early Ukrainian-Canadian Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Immigration, settlement, traditions and material culture of Ukrainians in Alberta to 1930, with special reference to activities at the Ukrainian Cultural Heritage Village. Note: This course is given in Spring/Summer only. Language of instruction is English. This course will not fulfil the Language other than English requirement of the BA degree.
UKR 400 Ukrainian through its Living Culture II =OPEN Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 3-0-0). Improves students’ language and cultural proficiency through direct experience of contemporary Ukrainian life in Lviv. Prerequisite: UKR 300 or 304 or consent of Department.
UKR 406 Business Ukrainian =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Advanced modern Ukrainian with emphasis on the vocabulary and communication style of the Ukrainian business world. Prerequisite: UKR 300 or 304 (formerly 402), or consent of Department.
UKR 475 Ukrainian Literature Today =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The course begins with developments on the eve of Ukrainian independence (1991). The dramatic transformation of literature is surveyed against the background of the collapse of communism and socialist realism. Emphasis is on the youngest and most radical generation of writers and critics, their styles, themes, and ideologies. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Note: Readings are available in English for students not taking Ukrainian as a major or minor.
UKR 495 Honors Thesis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
UKR 499 Special Topics =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
Graduate Courses
UKR 573 Ukrainian Modernism and Avant-Garde =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: consent of Department.
UKR 575 Ukrainian Literature Today =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Focus on post-colonial theories of art. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
UKR 599 Directed Reading =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
UKR 645 Studies in Ukrainian Literary Criticism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Detailed study of major critical texts from the 19th and 20th centuries.
UKR 697 Topics in Ukrainian Folklore =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0).
#
University
UNIV
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Undergraduate Courses
UNIV 101 First-Year Experience I Œ1.5 (fi 3) (either term, 0-3s-0). Topics relevant to successful academic performance including study skills, use of campus resources, stress management, and career planning.
UNIV 102 First-Year Experience II Œ1.5 (fi 3) (second term, 0-3s-0). Exploration and application of university regulations, faculty expectations, pathways to academic excellence, and practical methods for surviving the challenges of first year on campus.
#
Urban and Regional Planning
PLAN
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Faculty of Science
Graduate Courses
PLAN 500 Planning for Resilient Cities and Regions Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The role of adaptive and resilience oriented planning to contribute to the development of regions that can sustain themselves and prosper through change and uncertainty. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 501 Planning for Northern Regions and Resource Communities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The practice of planning for and in northern regions and resource communities. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 503 Master’s Project Proposal Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Supervised development of a literature review and project proposal examining resilience in northern and resource communities. Course is pass/fail. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 505 Master’s Major Project Œ6 (fi 12) (either term, 3-0-0). Completion of major project including development of major outputs identified by committee. Course is pass/fail. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 506 Master’s Planning Internship Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Internship with employer followed by reflective exercises on experience in workplace. Course is pass/fail. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 510 Physical Planning and Design Fundamentals Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development and interpretation of plans, zoning, policy, and bylaws. The introduction of design fundamentals for planners. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 511 Professional Practice and Ethics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The professional practice of planning is covered including the role of planners in society and professional ethics for planners. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 512 Advanced Finance for Planners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An introduction to municipal finances and the development process as it relates to the planning profession. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 515 Community Planning and Engagement Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Planning in the community context, including methods of public consultation and community-based development. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 516 Planning Law Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Includes an introduction to the legal basis for planning in Alberta and other provinces. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 517 Advanced Planning Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of planning theories and theories from other disciplines and their influence on the practice of planning. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 555 Advanced Environmental Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Issues in policy making, planning and management related to human interaction with the physical environment. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 570 Advanced GIS for Planners Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-0-1). The application of spatial analytic tools to planning topics. Assignments impart technical aspects through hands-on experience with commercial and in-house spatial analysis software. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: consent of Department.
PLAN 585 Advanced Topics in Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Exploring planning theories in the context of contemporary events phenomena. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. Prerequisite: consent of Department. Variable content course which may be repeated if topic(s) vary.
PLAN 595 Advanced Planning Studio Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Practical study of community planning processes, development or redevelopment projects, or other relevant case studies relating to resilience in northern and resource communities. Fieldwork required. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 598 Advanced Research Methods and Analysis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Collection and analysis of data for social research in planning in northern and resource communities. Research design and sampling procedures. Both qualitative and quantitative methods are explored. Fieldwork may be required. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
PLAN 599 Advanced Practical Field Study in Planning Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Intensive field or practical study in Planning, typically as part of a team working off-campus. Details and areas of study may vary from year to year; consult the department about current offerings, fees and timing. Sections offered in a Cost Recovery format at an increased rate of fee assessment. Requires payment of additional student instructional support fees. Refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar.
#
Women’s and Gender Studies
WGS
Women’s and Gender Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
WGS 101 Representations of Girls and Women =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). An exploration of the impact that cultural representations of femininity have on the political, economic, and social lives of girls and women throughout the world.
WGS 102 Gender and Social Justice =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 2-1s-0). Examines social and cultural constructions of gender, sexuality, race, class, and disability as well as visions for social justice.
WGS 220 Feminism and Popular Culture =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Selected cultural forms in Canadian and American society from feminist perspectives. The focus is both on developing a feminist critique of cultural representations of women, and on considering the possibilities of feminist intervention in and production of popular culture. Note: Not open to students with credit in W ST 320 or WGS 320.
WGS 240 Feminism and Food =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Women’s material relationships to food from a variety of feminist perspectives. Note: Not open to students with credit in W ST 340 or WGS 340.
WGS 244 Disability Studies =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interrogation of medical model of disability through cultural disability studies, including feminist and queer perspectives. Introduces students to social issues in disability studies, social policy, and social justice.
WGS 250 Gender and Science =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interdisciplinary exploration of gender and science, with an emphasis on intersections of gender, race, sexuality, and politics in historical and contemporary scientific practices. Note: Not open to students with credit in W ST 350 or WGS 350.
WGS 255 Gender and Sexuality in World and Indigenous Religions =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Historical and contemporary survey of ideas about, and practices relating to, gender and sexuality in world and indigenous religions.
WGS 260 Women and War =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to how women experience political conflicts, either in contemporary or historical contexts, focusing on how violence, access to resources, public decision-making, and social security impact women during and after conflict.
WGS 270 Feminism and Sexualities =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Approaches to, and key debates about, sexuality. Topics may include: sexology; critiques of heterosexuality; political lesbianism; queer theory; transgender and intersexuality; prostitution and sex work. Note: Not open students with credit in W ST 370 or WGS 370
WGS 298 Critical Issues =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course offers an introduction to select issues in Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies. A variable content course, which may be repeated if topics vary.
WGS 301 History of Feminist Thought Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The development of feminist thought and theories until the mid-20th century, including the contributions of, and tensions among various feminisms. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or departmental consent.
WGS 302 Feminist Research and Methodologies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Whether there can be and is a distinctive feminist perspective on research in various disciplines; the ways in which taking a feminist perspective or taking account of women in research, affects the research process. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WSG or W ST course, or departmental consent.
WGS 310 Gender, Development, and Beyond Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Study of the lives of men and women in the developing world, focusing on their experiences in the family, school, paid work, and the market, and on such development issues as health, environment, and human rights. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 315 Women and Gender in the Pre-Modern World Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introduction to the range of practices and ideas concerning women and gender that characterized premodern societies and cultures. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 321 Feminism and Film =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). Feminist analysis of gender, sexuality, ability, race/ ethnicity, and class/status in film. Content will vary in terms of genre, production, and language. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or WST course, or consent of department.
WGS 332 Contemporary Feminist Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). The origins and evolution of various schools of contemporary western feminist thought. Not available to students with credit in PHIL 332. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 360 Race, Class, and Gender Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Historical, contemporary and comparative perspectives on the interaction of race, class, and gender experiences. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 365 Gender, Conflict and Peace Building in International Relations Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Introducing students to the analysis of gender in international relations, drawing from literature on conflict and post conflict relations. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of Department.
WGS 380 Canadian Feminist Activisms Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of contemporary feminist activisms with an emphasis on second- and third-wave feminisms. This course may be offered as a Community Service Learning course. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 390 Ecofeminism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Feminist approaches to environmental ethics and politics. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 401 Directed Readings in Women’s and Gender Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Open only to Women’s and Gender Studies honors, majors and minors. Normally may be taken only once. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 402 Honors Seminar and Project Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: WGS 302.
WGS 431 Feminism and Sexual Assault Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Interdisciplinary consideration of conceptual, political and legal strategies that feminists have deployed to confront sexual coercion with an emphasis on contemporary North American context. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WSG or W ST course, or departmental consent.
WGS 440 Body Politics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). An examination of contemporary theoretical approaches to bodies and embodiment, with particular emphasis on the ways that race, class, sexuality, gender, and (dis)ability shape bodily experience. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 455 Feminism and Religion =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Ways in which women and pro-feminist men have constructed religious ideologies that are supportive of women’s power and agency. Note: Not open to students with credit in WGS 355 or W ST 355. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 460 Masculinities Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course surveys the status of masculinity and the emergence of contemporary masculinity studies. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 470 Sexualities: Special Topics Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). This course offers advanced examination of selected issues in sexuality studies. Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WGS or W ST course, or consent of department.
WGS 498 Topics in Women’s and Gender Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level WSG or W ST course, or departmental consent.
#
Work Experience
WKEXP
University of Alberta
Undergraduate Courses
Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Courses
WKEXP 981 Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students admitted into the Internship program. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Evaluation is based on appraisal of employer and mentor.
WKEXP 982 Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (first term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students admitted into the Internship program. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Evaluation is based on appraisal of employer and mentor.
WKEXP 983 Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 9) (second term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students admitted into the Internship program. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Evaluation is based on appraisal of employer and mentor.
WKEXP 984 Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Work Experience IV Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 985 Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences Work Experience V Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences students. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 986 Food Science and Technology Work Experience Œ3 (fi 6) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for students in the Food Science and Technology Specialization of the BSc Nutrition and Food Science Program. The work experience provides the student with exposure to the practical application of their specialization and the general work environment. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
Faculty of Arts Courses
WKEXP 801 Arts Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Arts students participating in the Cooperative Education route. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment related to their discipline. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 802 Arts Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Arts students participating in the Cooperative Education route. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment related to their discipline. Prerequisite: WKEXP 801 and consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 803 Arts Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Arts students participating in the Cooperative Education route. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment related to their discipline. Prerequisite: WKEXP 802 and consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 804 Arts Work Experience IV Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Arts students participating in the Cooperative Education route. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment related to their discipline. Prerequisite: WKEXP 803 and consent of the Faculty.
WKEXP 961 Psychology Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Arts in the Psychology Cooperative Program. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment. Prerequisite: consent of Department. [Faculty of Arts]
WKEXP 962 Psychology Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Arts in the Psychology Cooperative Program. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain further knowledge of the work environment. Prerequisite: WKEXP 961. [Faculty of Arts]
WKEXP 963 Psychology Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Arts in the Psychology Cooperative Program. The focus of the work experience is to further the student’s knowledge of the working world. Prerequisite: WKEXP 962. [Faculty of Arts]
Faculty of Business Courses
WKEXP 911 Business Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Business students admitted into the cooperative education option. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the cooperative education coordinator’s site evaluation report, and the student’s performance on the work-term report.
WKEXP 912 Business Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Business students admitted into the cooperative education option. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain experience in their chosen field of specialization. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the cooperative education coordinator’s site evaluation report, and the student’s performance on the work-term report. Prerequisite WKEXP 911.
WKEXP 913 Business Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Business students admitted into the cooperative education option. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to perform work directly related to their specialization. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the cooperative education coordinator’s site evaluation report, and the student’s performance on the work-term report. Prerequisite: WKEXP 912.
WKEXP 914 Business Work Experience IV Œ0 (fi 9) (two term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). An optional fourth four-month work placement for Business students admitted into the cooperative education option. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to perform work directly related to their specialization. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the cooperative education coordinator’s site evaluation report, and the student’s performance on the work-term report. Prerequisite: WKEXP 913 and permission of the Business Co-operative Education Office.
Faculty of Engineering Courses
WKEXP 901 Engineering Work Experience I Œ0.5 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Engineering students registered in the Cooperative Education Program. This work experience will provide the student with exposure to the practical application of engineering and the general work environment. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the student’s work term report, and the student’s ability to learn from the experiences of the work term. Prerequisite: ENGG 299.
WKEXP 902 Engineering Work Experience II Œ0.5 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Engineering students registered in the Cooperative Education Program. This work experience will provide the student with exposure to the practical application of engineering and the general work environment. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the student’s work term report, and the student’s ability to learn from the experiences of the work term. Prerequisite: WKEXP 901.
WKEXP 903 Engineering Work Experience III Œ0.5 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Engineering students registered in the Cooperative Education Program. This work experience will provide students with personal involvement in the practice of their engineering discipline commensurate with their level of academic preparation. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the student’s work term report, and the student’s ability to learn from the experiences of the work term. Prerequisite: WKEXP 902.
WKEXP 904 Engineering Work Experience IV Œ0.5 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Engineering students registered in the Cooperative Education Program. This work experience will provide students with personal involvement in the practice of their engineering discipline commensurate with their level of academic preparation. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the student’s work term report, and the student’s ability to learn from the experiences of the work term. Prerequisite: WKEXP 903.
WKEXP 905 Engineering Work Experience V Œ3 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Engineering students registered in the Cooperative Education Program. This work experience will provide students with personal involvement in the practice of their engineering discipline commensurate with their level of academic preparation. Evaluation will be based on the employer’s performance appraisal, the student’s work term report, and the student’s ability to learn from the experiences of the work term. Prerequisite: WKEXP 904.
WKEXP 906 Engineering Work Experience VI Œ3 (fi 7) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for students registered in the Biomedical Option in either Chemical, Materials, or Mechanical Engineering. This work experience will provide students with personal involvement in the practice of the biomedical engineering discipline. The work experience plan requires the approval from the Department prior to registration. At the completion of the four-month work term, students are required to submit a formal research report which will be assessed for credit. Prerequisite: completion of Term 4 in the Biomedical Option.
Faculty of Science Courses
WKEXP 931 Psychology Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Science in the Psychology Industrial Internship Program. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain an appreciation of the work environment. Prerequisite: consent of Department. [Faculty of Science]
WKEXP 932 Psychology Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Science in the Psychology Industrial Internship Program. The focus of the work experience will be for the student to gain further knowledge of the work environment. Prerequisite: WKEXP 931. [Faculty of Science]
WKEXP 933 Psychology Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 9) (either term, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Science in the Psychology Industrial Internship Program. The focus of the work experience is to further the student’s knowledge of the working world. Prerequisite: WKEXP 932. [Faculty of Science]
WKEXP 934 Psychology Work Experience IV Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Psychology students in the Faculty of Science in the Psychology Industrial Internship Program. The focus of the work experience is to further the student’s knowledge of the working world. Prerequisite: WKEXP 933. [Faculty of Science]
WKEXP 955 Science Work Experience I Œ0 (fi 9) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Science students admitted into the Science Internship program. The focus of the internship will be for students to perform work directly related to their degree. Work Experience registrations must be continuous. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty or Department.
WKEXP 956 Science Work Experience II Œ0 (fi 9) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Science students admitted into the Science Internship program. The focus of the internship will be for students to perform work directly related to their degree. Work Experience registrations must be continuous. Prerequisite: consent of the Faculty or Department.
WKEXP 957 Science Work Experience III Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Science students admitted into the Science Internship program. The focus of the internship will be for students to perform work directly related to their degree. Work Experience registrations must be continuous. Prerequisite: WKEXP 956.
WKEXP 958 Science Work Experience IV Œ0 (fi 1) (either term or Spring/Summer, unassigned). A four-month work placement for Faculty of Science students admitted into the Science Internship program. The focus of the internship will be for students to perform work directly related to their degree. Work Experience registrations must be continuous. Prerequisite: WKEXP 957.
#
Write (Creative Writing)
WRITE
Department of English and Film Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
WRITE 294 Introduction to Writing Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshops in which the student will be required to write poetry. Prerequisites: *6 of junior English (or equivalent), and consent of Instructor(s) based on a portfolio (see Instructor for deadline).
WRITE 295 Introduction to Writing Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshops in which the student will be required to write prose. Prerequisites: *6 of junior English (or equivalent), and consent of Instructor(s) based on a portfolio (see Instructor for deadline).
WRITE 298 Introduction to Writing Nonfiction Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). To increase the student’s ability to write clear nonfiction prose. Models of prose style will be central, combined with frequent practice in writing on the basis of such models. Prerequisite: *6 of junior English (or equivalent).
WRITE 392 Intermediate Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshops focusing on selected poetic technique and form. Prerequisite: WRITE 294 unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline
WRITE 393 Intermediate Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshops focusing on selected fiction techniques and form. Prerequisite: WRITE 295 unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline.
WRITE 395 Intermediate Creative Writing: Fiction Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: WRITE 295 unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline.
WRITE 397 Intermediate Nonfiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshop focusing on selected elements of nonfiction technique and form. Prerequisite: WRITE 298 unless waived by Instructor.
WRITE 398 Intermediate Creative Writing: Nonfiction Œ6 (fi 12) (two term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: WRITE 298 unless waived by Instructor.
WRITE 399 Projects in Genre Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Lectures and workshops emphasizing innovations across genres and/or specialized writing forms. Note: variable content course which may be repeated. Prerequisite: 200-level WRITE course unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline.
WRITE 494 Advanced Creative Writing: Poetry Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: WRITE 394 unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline.
WRITE 495 Advanced Creative Writing: Fiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: WRITE 395 unless waived by Instructor. Consult Instructor for portfolio deadline.
WRITE 498 Advanced Creative Writing: Nonfiction Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Prerequisite: WRITE 398 unless waived by Instructor.
WRITE 532 Tutorial: Fourth-Year Combined Honors Creative Writing Œ3-6 (variable) (variable, variable). In the third year of the Combined Honors in Creative Writing program, the Honors student, in consultation with the Department, will arrange for a writing project under the guidance of a member of the Department for the ensuing summer and winter. The project is to be an original creative project judged by the Department to be the equivalent of a half-year creative writing course for *3 or a full-year creative writing course for *6.
#
Writing Studies
WRS
Office of Interdisciplinary Studies Faculty of Arts
Undergraduate Courses
WRS 101 Exploring Writing =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This workshop course focuses on both the theory and practice of the writing process to help students experience firsthand how university writers enter into rich ongoing conversations by engaging with the words and ideas of others.
WRS 102 Writing in the Disciplines =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, variable). A blended learning course (combining online work and one weekly in-person meeting) that introduces students to academic writing in three broad areas: humanities, social sciences, and sciences. No prerequisite. May not be repeated. May contain alternative delivery sections; refer to the Fees Payment Guide in the University Regulations and Information for Students section of the Calendar. [Office of Interdisciplinary Studies]
WRS 103 An Introduction to Writing in the Sciences Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Basic principles and genres of writing for science students. Note: Restricted to students in the Faculty of Science.
WRS 104 Writing Persuasive Arguments Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduction to the principles, theories and practice of writing well supported and convincing arguments.
WRS 204 Introduction to Technical Writing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of and practice in key genres, processes, and strategies for technical communication. Prerequisites: *6 selected from 100-level ENGL or 100-level WRS, or consent of instructor.
WRS 206 Writing Special Effects: Rhetorical Grammar and Style =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of and practice in sentence structures to create/alter meaning and voice in nonfiction prose. Prerequisites: *6 selected from 100-level ENGL or 100-level WRS (or consent of instructor).
WRS 210 Introduction to Professional Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Analysis of and practice in key genres, processes, and strategies for professional communication. Prerequisites: *6 selected from 100-level ENGL or 100-level WRS, or consent of instructor.
WRS 301 Introduction to Writing Centre Practice =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introduces students to the primary themes of interdisciplinary writing studies and collaborative learning necessary to successfully work as peer writing coaches in a university writing centre. Building on the foundation of theory, the course guides students through coaching sessions to synthesize an appropriate coaching practice. Prerequisites: *6 selected from 100-level ENGL or 100-level WRS (or consent of instructor).
WRS 302 Proposal Writing =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This workshop course focuses on how to write proposals for grant funding. Students will study the genre as well as work with a social service agency to write funding proposals based on the needs of the agency.
WRS 305 Risk Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-0). Basic principles and processes of written forms of risk communication within the context of theoretical issues of the public’s right to know, rhetorical effectiveness, cultural awareness, and ethics. Prerequisites: *6 selected from 100-level ENGL or 100-level WRS or consent of the instructor.
WRS 402 Theories of Rhetoric Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This seminar introduces students to influential theories of rhetoric. Students will discuss and apply the theories in their analysis of contemporary texts and situations.
WRS 450 Capstone Portfolio Project =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Revision of documents and writing of new documents to create a portfolio of writing. Prerequisites: *12 selected from WRS, or consent of instructor.
Graduate Courses
WRS 500 Academic Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). This workshop course examines how to create persuasive, well-supported arguments in different genres in academic writing in all disciplines. Graduate students at all levels in all disciplines are welcome.
WRS 580 Directed Reading in Writing Studies Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Prerequisite: consent of program.
WRS 601 Composition Theory =OPEN-LIMITED Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
WRS 603 Writing Centre Theory Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Introducing students to research in writing studies with a focus on writing in the disciplines and in writing centres.
WRS 604 Writing and Disciplinarity Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
WRS 605 Issues in Second Language Writing Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0).
#
Zoology (Biological Sciences)
ZOOL
Department of Biological Sciences Faculty of Science
Notes
(1) See the following sections for listings of other Biological Sciences courses: Bioinformatics (BIOIN); Biology (BIOL); Botany (BOT); Entomology (ENT); Genetics (GENET); Microbiology (MICRB).
(2) See the following sections for listings of other relevant courses: Interdisciplinary Studies (INT D); Immunology and Infection (IMIN); Marine Science (MA SC); Paleontology (PALEO).
Undergraduate Courses
ZOOL 224 Vertebrate Diversity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A comparative survey of vertebrates, focusing on their morphology, classification, and phylogeny. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100.
ZOOL 241 Animal Physiology I: Homeostasis =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-1s-0). Survey of physiological systems that regulate levels of gases, food, energy, temperature, water, and ions. Examples from invertebrates and vertebrates. Students with credit in PHYSL 210 or 212 or 214 may not obtain credit in ZOOL 241. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or SCI 100.
ZOOL 242 Animal Physiology II: Intercellular Communication =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-1s-0). Endocrinology, immunology and neural, sensory, motor, and reproductive physiology. Examples from invertebrates and vertebrates. Students with credit in PHYSL 210 or 212 or 214 may not obtain credit in ZOOL 242. Prerequisite: BIOL 107 or SCI 100.
ZOOL 250 Survey of the Invertebrates =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). The functional anatomy and life cycles of the major invertebrate taxa are emphasized. Prerequisite: BIOL 108 or SCI 100.
ZOOL 303 Animal Developmental Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). An introduction to basic principles in animal development both in vertebrates and invertebrates. This course examines how the molecular, cellular and comparative approaches are integrated to explain the development of the egg into the embryo, and the cellular interactions that culminate in the development of organ systems. Prerequisite: BIOL 201 or CELL 201.
ZOOL 325 Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrates =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). A comparative survey of form and function in vertebrate animals. Lectures focus on patterns of evolution and adaptation. Laboratories offer detailed examinations of major organ systems in representative species. Prerequisite: a 200-level ZOOL course; ZOOL 224 strongly recommended. May not be taken for credit if credit already obtained in ZOOL 225.
ZOOL 340 Comparative Environmental Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). A comparative examination of the integrated responses of animals to environmental changes. This course focuses on both the acute physiological and long-term adaptations to dealing with environmental challenges. Focus is on biochemical and physiological responses to extreme environments. Prerequisite: ZOOL 241 or PHYSL 210 or 212 or 214.
ZOOL 342 Neurobiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-0). Nerve cells, nervous systems and neuromuscular systems from molecular, physiological, behavioral, and developmental perspectives. Examples from both invertebrates and vertebrates are given. Prerequisite: ZOOL 242 or PHYSL 210 or 212.
ZOOL 343 Comparative Endocrinology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-0). Endocrine systems and actions of hormones at the tissue, cell and molecular levels; vertebrate systems are emphasized. Prerequisite: ZOOL 242 or PHYSL 210 or 212 or 214.
ZOOL 344 Laboratory Exercises in Animal Physiology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 1-0-4). Physiological topics are reinforced in experimental lab exercises. Labs include computer simulations, artificial tissue models and animal models. Prerequisite: ZOOL 241 or 242 or PHYSL 210 or 212 or 214.
ZOOL 350 Biology and Evolution of Invertebrates =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 2-0-3). Invertebrate evolution and adaptations including topics on feeding and nutrition, motility, reproduction and development, and sensory systems. Emphasis will be on material from the primary literature. Laboratory exercises will involve advanced training in techniques of microscopy. Prerequisite: ZOOL 250. ZOOL 303 and ZOOL 351 recommended. Credit can only be obtained for one of ZOOL 350, 450 or 550. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 351 Freshwater Invertebrate Diversity =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Emphasis is on an identified collection of invertebrates found in Alberta’s lakes and streams. Lecture material pertains mainly to ecological features of the various fresh water groups. Prerequisite: ZOOL 250. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 352 Principles of Parasitism =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-3s-0). An introduction to protozoan, helminth and arthropod parasites of animals; principles of host and parasite adaptations, host defense, pathology, epidemiology, and ecology, and control of parasitic infections. World wide web-based laboratory tutorials emphasize morphology, life cycles, behavior, systematics and life history of parasites. Prerequisite: a 200-level Biological Sciences course (ZOOL 250 and IMIN 200 recommended).
ZOOL 354 Wildlife Disease =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Occurrence, principles, concepts, causes and significance of disease in wildlife. Laboratory exercises emphasize methods for the study of parasites of wild hosts. Prerequisite: one of BIOL 208, REN R 376, ZOOL 250.
ZOOL 370 Ethological Mechanisms =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). Animal behavior from an ethological perspective, with emphasis on the mechanisms underlying a variety of behaviors. The material is intended to complement that of ZOOL 371. Prerequisite or corequisite: ZOOL 241 or 242.
ZOOL 371 Behavioral Ecology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). Animal behavior from an ecological and evolutionary perspective, with emphasis on social behavior. The material is intended to complement that of ZOOL 370. Prerequisite: BIOL 208
ZOOL 402 Current Topics in Developmental Biology =OPEN Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in animal developmental biology from a molecular and cellular perspective. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Prerequisite: ZOOL 303. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 405 Biology of Fishes Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A survey of fish diversity focussing on the morphology, systematics, behavior, and ecology of the major groups. Laboratories feature extensive use of departmental collections, with an emphasis on Alberta species. Prerequisites: ZOOL 325 or both ZOOL 224 and a 300-level Biological Sciences course. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 406 Biology of Amphibians and Reptiles Œ3 (fi 6) (first term, 3-0-3). A survey of amphibian and reptile diversity focussing on morphology, systematics, behaviour, and ecology of major groups, within a phylogenetic and evolutionary framework. Laboratories feature extensive use of departmental collections, and include Albertan species. This course will normally include traditional lectures and student seminars. Prerequisite: ZOOL 325 or both ZOOL 224 and a 300-level Biological Sciences course. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 407 Biology of Birds Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 3-0-3). A survey of bird diversity focussing on the morphology, systematics, behaviour, and ecology of the major groups. Laboratories feature extensive use of departmental collections, with an emphasis on Alberta species. Prerequisites: ZOOL 325 or both ZOOL 224 and a 300-level Biological Sciences course.
ZOOL 408 Biology of Mammals Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-0-3). A survey of mammal diversity focussing on the morphology, systematics, behavior, and ecology of the major groups. Laboratories feature extensive use of departmental collections, with an emphasis on Alberta species. Prerequisites: ZOOL 325 or both ZOOL 224 and a 300-level Biological Sciences course.
ZOOL 441 Current Topics on Homeostasis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in cardiac, gut, renal, respiratory, temperature, and metabolic physiology. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Prerequisite: ZOOL 340. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 442 Current Topics in Intercellular Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in endocrinology, immunology, and neurobiology from molecular, cellular, and whole-animal perspectives. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Prerequisite: ZOOL 342 or 343 or 352 or PMCOL 371. Credit for this course may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 452 Topics in Parasitology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-2s-0). Experimental approaches to the study of parasitism, including topics on epidemiology, ecology, biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, pathology, and immunology of host-parasite relationships. Reading assignments emphasize experimental approaches to study eukaryotic host-parasite relationships. Prerequisite: ZOOL 352 or MMI 426 or consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both ZOOL 452 and 552.
Graduate Courses
Notes
(1) All 300- and 400-level courses in the Department of Biological Sciences may be taken for credit (except for BIOL 490, 498 and 499) by graduate students with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee.
(2) The following courses may be taken as an option in graduate programs in the Department of Biological Sciences with approval of the student’s supervisor or supervisory committee: BIOCH 510, 520, 530, 541, 550, 555, 560; CHEM 361, 363, 461; CELL 300, 301; REN R 511; IMIN 371, 372, 452, 501; MA SC 400, 401, 402, 410, 412, 420, 425, 430, 437, 440, 445, 470, 480; MMI 405, 415; NEURO 472; NU FS 363; PALEO 418, 419; PHARM 601.
ZOOL 502 Advanced Current Topics in Developmental Biology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in animal developmental biology from a molecular and cellular perspective. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Discussions are the same as for ZOOL 402, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 541 Advanced Current Topics on Homeostasis Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in cardiac, gut, renal, respiratory, temperature, and metabolic physiology. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Discussions are the same as for ZOOL 441, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 542 Advanced Current Topics in Intercellular Communication Œ3 (fi 6) (either term, 0-3s-0). Discussion of selected topics in endocrinology, immunology, and neurobiology from molecular, cellular, and whole-animal perspectives. Evaluation of the primary literature and communication skills are emphasized. Discussions are the same as for ZOOL 442, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit may be obtained more than once. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 550 Advanced Biology and Evolution of Invertebrates Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 2-0-3). Invertebrate evolution and adaptations including topics on feeding and nutrition, motility, reproduction and development, and sensory systems. Emphasis will be on material from the primary literature. Laboratory exercises will involve advanced training in techniques of microscopy. Lectures and labs are the same as for ZOOL 350, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit can only be obtained for one of ZOOL 350, 450 or 550. Offered in alternate years.
ZOOL 552 Advanced Topics in Parasitology Œ3 (fi 6) (second term, 3-2s-0). Experimental approaches to the study of parasitism, including topics on epidemiology, ecology, biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, pathology, and immunology of host-parasite relationships. Reading assignments emphasize experimental approaches to study eukaryotic host- parasite relationships. Lectures are the same as for ZOOL 452, but with additional assignments and evaluation appropriate to graduate studies. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Credit cannot be obtained for both ZOOL 452 and 552.